Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."

Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."



Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.
Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."

Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."

Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.
Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."

Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."



Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."Vestas - Matches; Vestai is the Roman goddess of the hearth, worshiped in a
temple containing the sacred fire tended by the vestal virgins.

Currency Conversion

Prices are quoted in old English currency, pounds, shillings, pence.

"12s. 6d." is read as "12 Shillings and 6 Pence."

Pence/penny
Shilling--12 pence.
Crown--5 shillings.
Pound--20 shillings.
Guinea--21 shillings.

The approximate value of 1900 prices in 2002 is:
1900 Unit    Value in 2002 Currency
             English Pound    US Dollars
Pence             .26          .48
Shilling         3.10         5.80
Crown           15.50        29.00
Pound           62.00       116.00

[End Transcriber's note.]

[Illustration: Large model locomotive]

Photo: Daily Mirror.
Large model locomotive built for one of the royal princes of Siam by
Messrs. Bassett-Lowke, Limited. It is one-quarter the size of a modern
express engine; weighs two tons, with tender; is fifteen feet long; will
pull seventy persons; and has a highest speed of about thirty miles an
hour.



THINGS TO MAKE
BY
ARCHIBALD WILLIAMS
AUTHOR OF
"VICTORIES OF THE ENGINEER,"
"HOW IT WORKS,"
"HOW IT IS MADE,"
ETC., ETC.
THOMAS NELSON AND SONS, LTD.
LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK



PREFACE.

The making for oneself of toys and other objects of a more or less useful
character has certain advantages over buying them. In the case of the more
elaborate and costly articles, it may enable one to possess things which
otherwise would be unobtainable. Secondly, a home-made article may give a
satisfaction more lasting than is conferred by a bought one, though it may
be less beautiful to look upon. Thirdly, the mere making should be a
pleasure, and must be an education in itself.

To encourage readers to "use their hands" the following chapters have been
written. The subjects chosen provide ample scope for the exercise of
ingenuity and patience; but in making my selection I have kept before me
the fact that a well-equipped workshop falls to the lot of but a few of the
boys who are anxious to develop into amateur craftsmen. Therefore, while
the easiest tasks set herein are very easy, the most difficult will not be
found to demand a very high degree of skill, or more than a very moderate
outlay on tools. I may say here that I have been over the ground myself to
find out its difficulties for my readers, and that I made an engine similar
to that described in Chapter XV (the most elaborate mechanism included in
the book) with very simple tools. Some of the items which I had on my
original list were abandoned, because they presupposed the possession of
comparatively expensive machines.

My selection has also been guided by the desire to cater for different
tastes. In some cases the actual manufacture of the thing described may be
regarded as the most instructive and valuable element, and may appeal most
forcibly to the "handy" boy; in others--the Harmonograph provides a good
instance--the interest centres round the experiments made possible by the
construction of a simple piece of apparatus; in some the utility of the
article manufactured is its chief recommendation.

I feel certain that anyone who follows out the pages of this volume with
hand as well as with eye, will have little reason to regret the time so
spent. The things made may in course of time be put aside and forgotten,
but the manual skill acquired will remain. Nowadays one can buy almost
anything ready-made, or get it made without difficulty; yet he who is able
to make things for himself will always have an advantage over the person to
whom the use of tools is an unprobed mystery.



CONTENTS.

I. SAWING TRESTLE
II. A JOINER'S BENCH
III. A HANDY BOOKSTAND
IV. A HOUSE LADDER
V. A DEVELOPING SINK
VI. A POULTRY HOUSE AND RUN
VII. A SHED FOR YOUR BICYCLE
VIII. A TARGET APPARATUS FOR RIFLE SHOOTING
IX. CABINET-MAKING
X. TELEGRAPHIC APPARATUS
XI. A RECIPROCATING ELECTRIC MOTOR
XII. AN ELECTRIC ALARM CLOCK
XIII. A MODEL ELECTRIC RAILWAY
XIV. A SIMPLE RECIPROCATING ENGINE
XV. A HORIZONTAL SLIDE-VALVE ENGINE
XVI. MODEL STEAM TURBINES
XVII. STEAM TOPS
XVIII. MODEL BOILERS
XIX. QUICK-BOILING KETTLES
XX. A HOT-AIR ENGINE
XXI. A WATER MOTOR
XXII. MODEL PUMPS
XXIII. KITES
XXIV. PAPER GLIDERS
XXV. A SELF-LAUNCHING MODEL AEROPLANE
XXVI. APPARATUS FOR SIMPLE SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS
XXVII. A RAIN GAUGE
XXVIII. WIND VANES WITH DIALS
XXIX. A STRENGTH-TESTING MACHINE
XXX. LUNG-TESTING APPARATUS
XXXI. HOME-MADE HARMONOGRAPHS
XXXII. A SELF-SUPPLYING MATCHBOX
XXXIII. A WOODEN WORKBOX
XXXIV. WRESTLING PUPPETS
XXXV. DOUBLE BELLOWS
XXXVI. A HOME-MADE PANTOGRAPH
XXXVII. A SILHOUETTE DRAWING MACHINE
XXXVIII. A SIGNALLING LAMP
XXXIX. A MINIATURE GASWORKS



THINGS TO MAKE.



I.  A SAWING TRESTLE

A strong and stable sawing trestle is one of the most important accessories
of the carpenter's shop, whether amateur or professional. The saw is
constantly being used, and for it to do its work accurately the material
must be properly supported, so that it cannot sway or shift. Anybody who
has been in the habit of using a wobbly chair or box to saw on will be
surprised to find how much more easily wood can be cut when resting on a
trestle like that illustrated by Figs. 1 to 3.

The top, a, of the trestle is 29 inches long, 4 inches wide, and 2 inches
thick. At one end it has a deep nick, to serve much the same purpose as the
notched board used in fretworking; also to hold on edge such things as
doors while their edges are planed up. Pushed back against the wall the
trestle is then "as good as a boy."

[Illustration: Fig I.--Leg of sawing trestle (left).  Trestle seen from
above (right).]

The four legs are made of 2 by 2 inch stuff. To start with, the pieces
should be 24 inches long, to allow for the waste of cutting on the angle.

Cutting the Notches.--Make four marks 7 inches from the four corners of
the top, set your bevel to an angle of 70 degrees (or cut an angle out of a
card with the help of a protractor), and lay a leg against each mark in
turn, the end projecting an inch or so above the top. Move the leg about
till it makes the proper angle at the mark, and draw a pencil line down
each side of the leg as close up as possible. Since the legs may vary
slightly in size, use each once only for marking, and number it and the
place to which it belongs.

Lines must now be drawn along the upper and under sides of the top,
parallel to and 3/4-inch from the edge, to complete the marking out of the
notches.

Cut just inside the side marks with a fine tenon saw, and remove the wood
between the cuts back to the top and bottom marks with a broad, sharp
chisel, making the surface of the cut as true and flat as you can. Then
"offer" the leg that belongs to the cut, its end projecting an inch or so.
If it won't enter, bevel off the sides of the cut very slightly till it
will. A good driving fit is what one should aim at. While the leg is in
place, draw your pencil in the angles which it makes with the top above and
below, to obtain the lines AB, CD (Fig. 2, a).

Bevelling the Legs.-The marking out of the bevels will be much expedited if
a template is cut out of tin or card. It should be just as wide as the
legs, and at a point 4 inches from one end run off at an angle of 162
degrees from one edge. (See Fig. 2,b.)

[Illustration: FIG. 2.-Showing how to cut sloping joint for trestle leg.]

Draw with a square a line, EEl, across what is to be the inside of the leg.
The template is applied to the end side of the leg and moved up till its
sloping edge occupies a position in which a perpendicular dropped on to it
from C is 1/2 inch long. Mark the line EF (Fig. 2, b) and the perpendicular
CG. The bevel is marked on the other side of the leg, the, angle of the
template being at E1 (Fig. 2, a) to guide the saw, which is passed down
through the leg just outside the marks till in line with CD. The piece is
detached by a cross cut along CG, CD. This procedure, which sounds very
complicated, but is really very simple, and performed much more quickly
than it can be described, yields a leg properly bevelled and provided with
a shoulder to take the weight of the top.

[Illustration: Fig.3--End elevation of sawing trestle.]

The leg at the diagonally opposite corner is an exact replica of the one
first made; the other two are similar, but the direction of the bevels is
reversed, as will be evident after a little consideration.

When all the legs are ready, knock them into place, driving the shoulders
tight up against the top, and nail them on. The projections are sawn off
roughly and planed down flush with the top. Then affix the tie C at each
end, and plane its edges off neatly.

Truing the Legs.--Stand the stool on end, top flat against the wall.
Measure off a 20-inch perpendicular from the wall to the outside corner of
each of the two upper legs. (Fig. 3.) Lay a straightedge from mark to mark,
and draw lines across the legs. Reverse the trestle, and do the same with
the legs at the other end. Then turn the trestle on its side, and draw
lines on the other outside faces of the legs, using the lines already made
as guides. If the operation has been carried through accurately, all eight
lines will be in a plane parallel to the top. Cut off the ends of the legs
below the lines, and the trestle is finished.



II.  A JOINER'S BENCH.

After finishing his sawing trestle the reader may be willing to undertake a
larger job, the manufacture of a joiner's bench--if he does not already
possess a good article--heavy and rigid enough to stand firm under plane
and hammer.

For the general design and detailed measurements he is referred to Figs. 4
and 5, in which the dimensions of each part are figured clearly. The length
of 5 feet, width of 2 feet (exclusive of the back E), and height of 2 feet
7-1/2 inches will be found a good average. If the legs prove a bit long for
some readers, it is a simple matter to lay a plank beside the bench to
raise the (human) feet an inch or two.

In order to give rigidity, the struts S1S2 of the trestles at the end and
the braces DD on the front are "halved" where they overlap the legs and
front so as to offer the resistance of a "shoulder" to any thrust.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--Front elevation of Joiner's bench]

Materials.--The cost of these will be, approximately: wood, 12s. 6d.; [12
Shillings. 6 Pence]  bench screw, 1s. 6d.; nails and screws, 1s.; or 15s.
in all. It is advisable to show the timber merchant the specifications, so
that he may cut up the stuff most economically.

If the wood is mill-planed before delivery a lot of trouble will be saved,
as no further finish will be required, except perhaps at the top corners.
In passing, one should remark that the boards used should be of the widths
and lengths given; while as regards thickness the figures must be taken as
nominal, as in practice the saw cut is included. Thus a 1-inch board would,
when planed, be only 7/8 to 15/16 inch thick, unless the actual size is
specified, in which case something extra might be charged.


Construction.

The Trestles.--These should be made first. Begin by getting all the legs
of exactly the same length, and square top and bottom. Then cut off two
22-inch lengths of the 6 by 1 inch wood, squaring the ends carefully. Two
of the legs are laid on the floor, one end against the wall or a batten
nailed to the floor and arranged parallel to one another, as gauged by the
piece C, which is nailed on perfectly square to both, and with its top edge
exactly flush with the ends of the legs.

Next take the 3 by 1 inch wood for the struts, and cut off a piece 32
inches long. Two inches from one end of it make a cross mark with the
square, and from the ends of the mark run lines towards the end at an angle
of 45 degrees. Cut along these lines, and lay one of the edges just cut up
against C, and flush with the outer edge of L1 (Fig. 5). Tack the strut on
temporarily to both legs, turn the trestle over, and draw your pencil
(which should have a sharp point) along the angles which the strut makes
with the legs. This gives you the limits of the overlaps. Detach the strut.

The marking-gauge now comes into use. Set it at 3/8 inch, and make marks on
the sides of the strut down to the limits, pressing the guide against what
will be the inner face of the board. The ends must now be divided down
along the gauge scratches to the limit mark with a tenon or panel saw, the
saw being kept on the inside of the mark, So that its cut is included in
the 3/8 inch, and a cross cut made to detach the piece and leave a
shoulder. The strut is "offered" again to the legs, and a mark is drawn
across the bottom parallel to the ends or the legs for the final saw cut.
Nail on the strut, pressing the legs well up against the shoulders. Its
fellow on the other side of the legs is prepared in exactly the same
manner; and the second trestle is a duplicate of the first, with the
exception that the directions of the struts are reversed relatively to the
C piece, to preserve the symmetry--which, however, is not an important
point.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--End elevation of joiner's bench.]

Back and Front.--The only operation to be performed on the front piece B
and the back G is the notching of them both on the inside faces at the
centre to take the ends of the bearer F, which performs the important
function of preventing any bending of the top planks. Lay the boards
together, top edges and ends level, and mark them at the same time. The
square is then used on the faces to give the limits for the notches, which
should be 1/4 inch deep and chiselled out carefully.

Draw cross lines with your square 3 inches from each end of both pieces, on
the inside, to show where the legs are to be. Bore holes in the boards for
the 3-inch screws which will hold them to the legs.

Attaching the Trestles.--Stand the trestles on their heads and lay the
back and front up to them, using the guide marks just drawn. A nail driven
part way in through one of the screw holes, and a batten tacked diagonally
on the DD lines, will hold a leg in position while the screws are inserted.
(Make sure that the tops of the legs and the top edges of B and G are in
the same plane.)

Affixing the Braces.--The braces DD, of 3 by 1 inch stuff, can now be
marked off and cut exactly down the middle to the limits of the overlap.
Screw on the braces.

The bearer F is next cut out. Its length should be such as to maintain the
exact parallelism of B with G, and the ends be as square as you can cut
them. Fix it in position by two 2-inch screws at each end.

The bench is now ready for covering. Begin with the front board, A1. Bore
countersunk holes for 3-inch screws over the centre of the legs and half an
inch from the front edge, 1 foot apart. Arrange Al with its front edge
perfectly flush with the face of B, and tack it in place by nails driven
through a couple of screw holes, and insert all the screws. The middle
board, A2, is laid up against it, and the back board, A3 (bored for screws
like the front board), against that. Screw down A3.

You must now measure carefully to establish lines over the centres of CC
and F. Attach each board to each of these by a couple of screws. All screws
in the top of the bench are countersunk 1/8 inch below the surface. Screw
the ledge E, of 4 by 5/8 inch wood, on to the back of G, with 2-1/2 inches
projecting. This will prevent tools, etc., slipping off the bench.

[Illustration:  Fig. 6.--Perspective view of joiner's bench]

The Vice.--This important accessory consists of an 8 by 2 by 15 inch
piece, V, a 2-inch diameter wooden bench screw and threaded block, and a
guide, F.  (Note.--A 1-1/8-inch diameter wrought iron screw is very
preferable to the wooden, but its cost is about 4s. more.) V should be
tacked to B while the 2-inch hole for the bench screw is bored through both
with a centre bit, at a point 8 inches from the guide end on the centre
line of V. This hole must be made quite squarely to enable the screw to
work freely. If a 2-inch bit is not available, mark out a 2-inch ring and
bore a number of small holes, which can afterwards be joined by a pad-saw;
and finish, the hole thus formed with a half-round rasp. The threaded block
for the screw is attached to the inner side of H in the angle formed by the
leg and the board A1. The guide F is then fitted. This is pinned in to V,
and the slides through B. If a rectangular piece is used, cut the hole in V
first; then screw V up tightly, and mark B through V. It may be found more
convenient to use a circular piece, in which case the holes for it can be
centre-bitted through V and B in one operation. If after fitting V projects
above A, plane it down level.

The finishing touches are rounding off all corners which might catch and
fray the clothes, and boring the 3/4-inch holes, HH, for pegs on which
planks can be rested for edge planing.

For a "stop" to prevent boards slipping when being planed on the flat, one
may use an ordinary 2-inch wood screw, the projection of which must of
course be less than the thickness of the board planed. Many carpenters
employ this very simple expedient; others, again, prefer a square piece of
wood sliding stiffly through a hole in A1 and provided on top with a
fragment of old saw blade having its teeth projecting beyond the side
facing the work. The bench is countersunk to allow the teeth to be driven
down out of the way when a "clear bench" is required.

Just a word of warning in conclusion. Don't be tempted to nail the parts
together--with the exception of the trestle components--to save
trouble. The use of screws entails very little extra bother, and gives you
a bench which can be taken to pieces very quickly for transport, and is
therefore more valuable than a nailed one.



III.  A HANDY BOOKSTAND.

A bookstand of the kind shown in Fig. 7 has two great advantages: first, it
holds the books in such a position that their titles are read more easily
than when the books stand vertically; second, it can be taken to pieces for
packing in a few moments, as it consists of but four pieces held together
by eight removable wedges. We recommend it for use on the study table.

Oak or walnut should preferably be chosen as material, or, if the maker
wishes to economize, American whitewood or yellow pine. Stuff  1/4 inch
(actual) thick will serve throughout if the stronger woods are used; 3/8
inch for the shelf parts in the case of whitewood or pine.

The ends (Fig. 8) are sawn out of pieces 5-1/2 by 10 inches, and nicely
rounded off on all but the bottom edge, which is planed flat and true. The
positions for the holes through which the shelf eyes will project must be
marked accurately, to prevent the stand showing a twist when put together.
The simplest method of getting the marks right is to cut a template out of
thin card and apply it to the two ends in turn, using the base of each as
the adjusting line. Fret-saw the holes, cutting just inside the lines to
allow for truing up with a coarse file.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.--Perspective view of bookstand.]

The shelves a and b are 15 inches long, exclusive of the lugs c, c, c, c,
and 4-1/2 and 4-3/4 inches wide respectively. As will be seen from Fig. 8,
b overlaps a. Both have their top edges rounded off to prevent injury to
book bindings, but their bottom edges are left square.

As the neatness of the stand will depend largely on a and b fitting closely
against the sides, their ends should be cut out and trued carefully,
special attention being paid to keeping the shoulders between and outside
the lugs in a straight line. The wedge holes in c, c, c, c measure 1/2 by
1/4 inch, and are arranged to be partly covered by the sides, so that the
wedges cannot touch their inner ends. (See Fig. 9.) This ensures the
shelves being tightly drawn up against the sides when the wedges are driven
home.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.--End elevation of bookstand.]

The wedges should be cut on a very slight taper of not more than half an
inch in the foot run, in order to keep their grip. Prepare a strip as thick
as the smaller dimension of the holes, 3/8 inch wide at one end, and 7/8
inch wide at the other. Assemble the parts and push the piece through a
hole until it gets a good hold, mark it across half an inch above the hole,
and cut it off. Then plane the strip down parallel to the edge that follows
the grain until the end will project half an inch beyond the lug next
fitted. Mark and cut off as before, and repeat the process until the eight
wedges are ready in the rough. Then bevel off the outside corners and
smooth them--as well as the rest of the woodwork--with fine glass
paper.

Shelves and sides should be wax-polished or given a coat or two of varnish.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. Plan or bookstand shelf.]

Don't drive the wedges in too tight, or yon may have to lament a split lug.

If the stand is to be used for very heavy books, or the shelves are much
longer than specified here, it is advisable to bring the angle of the
shelves down to the bottom of the standards, to relieve the shelves of
bending strain at the centre; or to use stouter material; or to unite the
shelves at two or three points by thin brass screws inserted through holes
drilled in the overlapping part.



IV.  A HOUSE LADDER.

The preparation and putting together of the parts of a ladder having round,
tapered rungs let into holes in the two sides is beyond the capacity of the
average young amateur; but little skill is needed to manufacture a very
fairly efficient substitute for the professionally-built article--to wit,
a ladder of the kind to which builders apply the somewhat disparaging
adjective "duck."

The rungs of such a "duck" ladder are merely nailed to the outside if the
ladder is required for temporary purposes only; but as we are of course
aiming at the construction of a thing made to last, we shall go to the
trouble of "notching-in" each rung (see Fig. 10), so that the sides shall
take the weight directly, and the nails only have to keep the rungs firmly
in position. The objection to notching-in is that it reduces the strength
of the ladder, which is of course only that of the wood between the bottom
of the notches and the plain side. Therefore it is necessary to have sides
somewhat deeper than would be required for a centrally-runged ladder;
which is pierced where the wood is subjected to little tension or
compression.

[Illustration:  Fig. 10--House ladder and details of letting in a rung]

Materials.--The length of the ladder will decide what the stoutness of
the sides should be. For a ladder about 12 feet long, such as we propose to
describe, larch battens 3 by 1-1/8 inches (actual) in section and free from
knots, especially at the edges, will be sufficiently strong to carry all
reasonable weights without danger of collapse. But be sure to get the best
wood obtainable. The rungs may be of 2 by 1 inch stuff, though 2 by 3/4
inch will suffice for the upper half-dozen, which have less wear, and are
shorter than those below.

The rungs are 10 inches apart (Fig. 10), centre to centre. The distance may
be increased to a foot, Or even more if weight-saving is an object.


CONSTRUCTION.

Preparing the Sides.--These are cut to exactly the same length, which we
will assume to be 11 feet 6 inches, planed quite smooth and rounded off
slightly at the corners to make handling comfortable. Before marking them
for the rungs it is important that they shall be so arranged that both
incline equally towards a centre line.

Stretch a string tightly three inches above the ground, and lay the sides
of the ladder on edge to right and left of it, their ends level. Adjust the
bottom ends 8-1/2, the top ends 6-1/2 inches from the string, measuring
from the outside. Tack on cross pieces to prevent shifting, and then,
starting from the bottom, make a mark every 10 inches on the outside
corners, to show the position of the tops of the rungs. A piece of the wood
to be used for making the rungs of is laid up to the pairs of marks in
turn, and lines are drawn on both sides of it.

Cutting the Notches.--The work of marking the ends of the notches will be
quickened, and rendered more accurate, if a template (Fig. 10) is cut out
of tin. The side AC is 3/8 to 1/2 inch deep. Apply the template to both
faces of the side in turn, with its corner A at the line below the rung,
and DE flush with the upper corner. When all the notches have been marked
cut down the AC line of each with a tenon saw, and chisel along BC till the
wedge-shaped chip is removed. Finish off every notch as neatly as possible,
so that the rungs may make close contact and keep water out.

Preparing the Rungs.--Lay a piece of rung batten across the lowest
notches, the end overhanging the side by a quarter of an inch or so to
allow for the taper of the ladder, and draw your pencil along the angles
which it makes with the sides. Mark the positions of the nail holes. Cut
off the rung at the cross lines; drill the four nail holes on the skew, as
shown in Fig. 10; and round off all the corners. The other rungs are
treated in the same manner, and the sides are then separated, for the
inside top corner and both back corners, which will be handled most, to be
well rounded off and rubbed smooth with glass paper.

Assembling.--Before putting the parts together give them a coating of
paint, as the contact surfaces will not be accessible to the brush
afterwards. When the paint has dried, lay the sides out as before, and nail
on the rungs with 3-inch nails. To counteract any tendency of the sides to
draw apart, a light cross bar should be fixed on the back of the ladder
behind the top and bottom rungs.

Round off the end angles of the rungs, and apply a second coating of paint.

Note.--A ladder of this kind is given a more presentable appearance if
the rungs are let in square to the sides and flush, but at the sacrifice
either of strength or lightness, unless narrow rungs of a hard wood, such
as oak, be used. Moreover, square notches are not so easy to cut out as
triangular.

For a short ladder, not more than 9 feet long, the section of the sides may
safely be reduced to 2-3/4 by 1 inch (actual), if good material is
selected.



V.  A DEVELOPING SINK.

Many amateur photographers are obliged to do their developing in odd
corners and under conditions which render the hobby somewhat irksome if a
large number of plates have to be treated. The main difficulty is to secure
an adequate water supply and to dispose of the waste water. At a small
expenditure of money and energy it is easy, however, to rig up a
contrivance which, if it does not afford the conveniences of a properly
equipped dark room, is in advance of the jug-and-basin arrangement with
which one might otherwise have to be content. A strong point in favour of
the subject of this chapter is that it can be moved without any trouble if
the photographer has to change his quarters.

The foundation, so to speak, of the developing sink is a common wooden
washstand of the kind which has a circular hole in the top to hold the
basin. A secondhand article of this sort can be purchased for a shilling or
two. A thoroughly sound specimen should be selected, even if it is not the
cheapest offered, especial attention being paid to its general rigidity and
the good condition of the boards surrounding the basin shelf.

[Illustration:  Fig. 11.--A home-made developing sink for the darkroom.]

The area of the top is generally about 20 by 15 inches; but if a stand of
larger dimensions can be found, choose it by preference.

The general design of the sink and its equipment is shown in Fig. 11. For
the uprights, which rest on the beading of the washstand, use two boards 9
inches wide, 1/2 inch (actual) thick, and 36 inches long. The top shelf, to
carry the pail or other water container, should be of 1-inch stuff; and the
two lower shelves be not more than 5 inches wide and 3/4 inch thick. Space
the shelves at least 11 inches apart, so that they may accommodate tall
bottles. The superstructure will gain in rigidity if the intermediate
shelves are screwed to the uprights, in addition to being supported on
ledges as indicated; and if the back is boarded over for at least half its
height, there will be no danger of sideways collapse, when a full bucket is
put in position.

The top of the washstand, on which the developing will be done, must be
provided with a tray of lead or zinc. Lead is preferable, as lying flatter;
but the jointing at the corners is more difficult than the soldering of
sheet zinc, which, though more liable to chemical corrosion, is much
lighter than the thinnest lead--weighing about 1-1/2 lbs. to the square
foot--that could well be used. If lead is selected, the services of a
plumber had better be secured, if the reader has had no experience in
"wiping a joint."

A zinc tray is prepared by cutting out of a single sheet a piece of the
shape shown in Fig. 12. The dimensions between the bending lines (dotted)
are 1/8 inch less in both directions than those of the shelf. The turn-ups
a, a, b, b, should not be less than 1-1/2 inches wide. Allow half an inch
at each end of b b for the turnover c. Turn a a up first, then b b, and
finally bend c c round the back of a a, to which they are soldered. A drop
of solder will be needed in each corner to make it water-tight. When
turning up a side use a piece of square-cornered metal or wood as mould,
and make the angles as clean as possible, especially near the joints.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.--Showing how the tray for sink is marked out.]

A drain hole, an inch or so in diameter, is cut in the centre of the tray.
To prevent the hands being injured by the tray, the front should be covered
by a 1/2-inch strip of zinc doubled lengthwise, or be made a bit deeper
than 1-1/2 inches in the first instance and turned over on itself.

Before the tray is put in position the basin hole must be filled in, except
for an opening to take the waste pipe. The plug is pad-sawed out of wood of
the same thickness as the top, to which it is attached by crossbars on the
under side. The whole of the woodwork, or at least those parts which are
most likely to get wetted, should then be given a coat or two of paint.

A waste pipe, somewhat larger than the drain hole and 3 inches long, having
been firmly soldered to the tray, beat the edges of the hole down into the
pipe. Then prepare a wooden collar to fit the pipe outside, and drill a
hole on the centre line to take a carpenter's screw. If the edges of the
tray are supported on slats 3/16 to 1/4 inch thick, and its centre is kept
in contact with the wood by the collar pressing against the underside of
the shelf, any water will naturally gravitate to the centre and escape by
the waste pipe. This automatic clearance of "slops" is a very desirable
feature of a developing sink.

To prevent water splashing on to the sides of the stand and working down
between tray and wood, tack pieces of American cloth on the sides with
their edges overlapping the tray edges by an inch or so.

A small two-handled bath is the most convenient receptacle for the waste
water. It should hold at least a quarter as much again as the water tank,
so as to avoid any danger of overfilling. A piece of old cycle tyre tubing,
tied to the waste pipe and long enough to reach below the edge of the bath,
will prevent splashing--which, when chemicals are being poured away, might
prove disastrous to light-coloured clothes.

The supply pipe has a siphon-piece of "compo" tubing at the top, to draw
off the water when the tube has been filled by suction, and a small tap at
the bottom. This tap, when not in use, should be held back out of the way
by a wire hook attached to the lowest of the upper shelves. A piece of
linoleum should be cut to fit the bath-shelf and protect the drawer below.



VI.  A POULTRY HOUSE AND RUN.

This chapter should be of interest to the keeper of poultry on a small
scale, for even if the instructions given are not followed out quite as
they stand, they may suggest modifications to suit the taste and means of
the reader.

The principle of the combined run and house--which will accommodate a dozen
fowls without overcrowding, especially if it be moved from time to time on
to fresh ground--will be understood from Figs. 13 and 14. The first of
these shows the framework to which the boards for the house and the wire
for the run are nailed. Its over-all length of 10 feet is subdivided into
five "bays" or panels, 2 feet long (nearly) between centres of rafters. Two
bays are devoted to the house, three to the run.

[Illustration:  Fig. 13.--Frame for poultry house and run (above).
Completed house and run (below).]


One square (10 by 10 feet) of weather boarding
6 inches wide, for covering in the house.
44 feet of 4 by 1, for base and ridge.
56 feet of 3 by 1, for eight rafters.
28 feet of 3 by 1-1/2, for four rafters.
50 feet of 2 by 1-1/2, for door frames and doors.
6 feet of 2 by 2, for tie t.
45 feet of 2-foot wire netting.
Two pairs of hinges; two locks; staples, etc.


The materials used comprise:--
The total cost as estimated from prices current at the time of writing is
25s. This cost could be considerably reduced by using lighter stuff all
through for the framework and doors and by covering in the house with old
boards, which may be picked up cheaply if one is lucky. Whether it is
advisable to sacrifice durability and rigidity to cost must be left to the
maker to decide. Anyhow, if the specifications given are followed, an
outfit warranted to last for several years will be produced.

A Few Points.--The vertical height of the run is just under 6 feet, the
tips being cut away from the rafters at the apex. The width at the ground
is exactly 6 feet. The base angles made by AA with B (Fig. 14) are 63
degrees; that which they make with one another, 54 degrees. The rafters r1
and r3 at each end of the house are half an inch thicker than the rest, as
they have to stand a lot of nailing.


CONSTRUCTION.

Cutting the Rafters.--If floor space is available, chalk out accurately
the external outline of a pair of rafters (80 inches long each before
shaping) and a line joining their lower ends. Then draw a line bisecting
the ridge angle. With this template as guide the rafters can be quickly cut
to shape. Another method is to cut one rafter out very carefully, making a
notch for half the width of the ridge, and to use it as a pattern for the
rest. In any case the chalked lines will prove useful in the next operation
of pairing the rafters and uniting them by a tie just under the ridge
notch. Cut a 4 by 1 inch notch at the bottom of each rafter, on the
outside, for the base piece. The two end pairs have the B pieces (Fig. 14)
nailed on to them, and r3 the tie t, which should be in line with the
rafters. The other three pairs require temporary ties halfway up to prevent
straddling during erection.

Door Frames and Doors.--The method of fixing the frame of the door at the
run end is shown in Fig. 14. The material for the frame being 1/2 inch
thicker than that of the rafters, there is room for shoulders at the top
angles, as indicated by dotted lines. The door frame at the house end is of
the same thickness as r1 so that no overlapping is possible. This being the
case, screws should be used in preference to nails, which are liable to
draw a sloping face out of position as they get home.

[Illustration:  Fig. 14.--On left, elevation of end of run; on right,
door for run.]

The doors are made of 2 by 2 inch stuff, halved at the corners. Cut out the
top and bottom of the two sides; lay them on the floor so as to form a
perfect rectangle, and nail them together. The strut is then prepared, care
being taken to get a good fit, as any shortness of strut will sooner or
later mean sagging of the door. Cut the angles as squarely as possible, to
ensure the strut being of the same length both inside and out.

Note.--As the door is rectangular, it does not matter which corners are
occupied by the ends of the strut; but when the door is hung, the strut
must run relatively to the side on which the hinges are, as shown in Fig.
14. Amateurs--even some professionals--have been known to get the strut the
wrong way up, and so render it practically useless.

Covering the Ends of the House.--The ends of the house should be covered
before erection, while it is still possible to do the nailing on the flat.
The run end is boarded right over, beginning at the bottom, and allowing
each board to overlap that below it by 1 inch. The board ends are flush
with the outer sides of the rafters. When boarding is finished, cut (with a
pad saw) a semicircular-topped run hole, 14 inches high and 8 inches wide,
in the middle of the bottom. Any structural weakness caused by severing the
two lowest boards is counteracted by the two grooved pieces in which the
drop-door moves.

Odds and ends of weather boards should be kept for the door end of the
house, which requires short pieces only, and is not boarded below the top
of b2. The door may be weather-boarded to match the rest of the end, or
covered by a few strakes of match-boarding put on vertically.

The two base pieces, b1 and b2, and the ridge should be marked off for the
rafters at the same time. All three are 10-foot lengths of 4 by 1 wood,
unless you prefer the ridge to project a bit, in which case you must allow
accordingly.

Stand all three pieces together on edge, and make the marks with a square
across the tops. Allow a distance of 4 feet between the outside faces of r1
and r3; halve this distance to get the centre of r2; and subdivide the
distance between r3 and r6 so that each rafter is separated from its
neighbours by an equal space, which will be 1 foot 11 inches. Number the
marks and continue them down the sides of the boards with the square. There
should be a mark on each side of the place to be occupied by the
intermediate rafters, to prevent mistakes; for it is obvious that if a
rafter is fixed on the left side of a single ridge mark and on the right of
the corresponding mark on the base, the result will not be pleasing.

Erection.--The services of a second pair of hands are needed here, to
hold while nailing is done. Nail holes having been drilled in the tops of
the rafters and in the base pieces, the ends are stood upright and tacked
to the ridge at the places marked for them, and after them the intermediate
rafters, working from one end to the other. Then tack on the base pieces,
b1, b3. Get the ends quite perpendicular, and nail a temporary cross strut
or two on the outside of the rafters to prevent shifting while the final
nailing up is done.

Covering the Shed.--Sixteen boards, 4 feet 2 inches long, are needed for
each side, as, owing to the overlap of one inch, each tier covers only five
of the 80 inches. The ridge is made watertight by a strip of sheet zinc, a
foot wide, bent over the top and nailed along each edge.

Waterproofing.--All the woodwork should now be given a coating of
well-boiled tar, paint, creosote, or some other preservative, worked well
down into the cracks. Creosote and stoprot are most convenient to use, as
they dry quickly.

Netting.--When the preservative has dried, fix on the netting with
3/4-inch wire staples. Begin at the base on one side, strain the netting
over the ridge, and down to the base on the other side. Be careful not to
draw the rafters out of line sideways. The last edge stapled should be that
on the roof of the house.

Note.--When driving nails or staples into a rafter or other part, get a
helper to hold up some object considerably heavier than the hammer on the
farther side to deaden the blow. Lack of such support may cause damage,
besides making the work much more tedious and difficult.

Finishing off.--The doors are now hung, and fitted with buttons and
padlocks. The stops should be on the doors, not on the frames, where they
would prove an obstruction in a somewhat narrow opening. Perches should be
of 2 by 1 inch wood, rounded off at the top, and supported in sockets at
each end so as to be removable for cleaning; and be all on the same level,
to avoid fighting for the "upper seats" among the fowls. A loose floor,
made in two pieces for convenience of moving, will help to keep the fowls
warm and make cleaning easier, but will add a few shillings to the cost.
The inside of the house should be well whitewashed before fowls are
admitted. To prevent draughts the triangular spaces between the roof boards
and rafters should be plugged, but ample ventilation must be provided for
by holes bored in the ends of the house at several elevations, the lowest 2
feet above the base. Handles for lifting may be screwed to the faces of b
and b2 halfway between the door frame and the corners.



VII.  A SHED FOR YOUR BICYCLE.

The problem, how to house one or more cycles, often gives trouble to the
occupiers of small premises. The hall-way, which in many cases has to serve
as stable, is sadly obstructed by the handles of a machine; and if one is
kept there, the reason generally is that no other storage is available.

If accommodation is needed permanently for two or three cycles belonging to
the house, and occasionally for the machine of a visitor, and if room is
obtainable in a backyard or garden in direct communication with the road,
the question of constructing a really durable and practical cycle shed is
well worth consideration. I say constructing, because, in the first place,
a bought shed costing the same money would probably not be of such good
quality as a home-made one; and secondly, because the actual construction,
while not offering any serious difficulty, will afford a useful lesson in
carpentry.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Cycle shed completed.]

Cycle sheds are of many kinds, but owing to the limitations of space it is
necessary to confine attention to one particular design, which specifies a
shed composed of sections quickly put together or taken apart--portability
being an important feature of "tenants' fixtures"--and enables fullest
advantage to be taken of the storage room. As will be seen from the scale
drawings illustrating this chapter, the doors extend right across the
front, and when they are open the whole of the interior is easily
accessible. The fact that the cycles can be put in sideways is a great
convenience, as the standing of the machines head to tail alternately
economizes room considerably.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.--Plan of corner joints of cycle shed.]

I ought to mention before going further that the shed to be described is
very similar, as regards design and dimensions, to one in a back issue of
Cycling. By the courtesy of the proprietors of the journal I have been
permitted to adapt the description there given.[1]

[Footnote 1: By Mr. Hubert Burgess. ]

Dimensions and General Arrangements.--The shed is 8 feet long over all, 5
feet 6 inches high in front, 5 feet high at the back, 3 feet deep over all,
under the roof, which projects 3 inches fore and aft, and 2 inches at each
end. It consists of seven parts: two sides, roof, back, front frame and
doors, and a bottom in two sections.

The reader should examine the diagrams (Figs. 16 to 24) to get a clear
understanding of the disposal of the parts at the corners. Fig. 16 makes it
plain that the frames of the back and front overlap the frames of the
sides, to which they are bolted; and that the covering of the back overlaps
the covering of the sides, which in turn overlaps the front frame.

All corner joints are halved. In order to allow the doors to lie flush with
the front of the doorframe uprights, the last must project the thickness of
the door boards beyond the frame longitudinals; and to bring the front
uprights of the sides up against the uprights of the door frame, the
longitudinals are notched, as shown (Fig. 16), to the depth of the set-back
for the doors.

Materials.--The question of cost and the question of materials cannot be
separated. A shed even of the dimensions given consumes a lot of wood, and
the last, that it may withstand our variable and treacherous climate for a
good number of years, should, as regards those parts directly exposed to
the weather, be of good quality. Yellow deal may be selected for the
boards; pitch pine is better, but it costs considerably more. For the
frames and non-exposed parts generally ordinary white deal will suffice.

[Illustration:   FIG. 17.-Types of match boarding: (a) square joint; (b)
double.-V;  (c) single-V.]

The scale drawings are based on the assumption that matching of one of the
forms shown in Fig. 17, and measuring 4 inches (actual) across, exclusive
of the tongue, and 5/8 inch (actual) thick, is used.

As advised in the case of the carpenter's bench, (p. 15) the prospective
constructor should let the wood merchant have the specifications, so that
he may provide the material in the most economical lengths. The following
is a rough estimate of the wood required, allowing a sufficient margin for
waste:

4-1/2 (over tongue) by 5/8 inch (actual) yellow match boarding for sides,
roof, back, and doors:

1-1/2 squares = 150 sq. feet. = 450 feet run.
White 4-1/2 by 3/4 inch square-shouldered flooring:
1/4 square = 25 sq. feet. = 75 feet run.
3 by 1-1/2 inch battens = 88 feet run.
4 by 1-1/2 inch battens = 26 feet run.
3 by 2  inch battens = 27 feet run.
5 by 1-1/2 inch battens = 8 feet run.
2 by 1-1/2 inch battens = 21 feet run.

There will also be required:
Twelve 6-inch bolts and nuts.
Two pairs 18-inch cross-garnet hinges.
Two door bolts.
One lock (a good one).
Four yards of roofing felt.
Two gallons of stoprot.
Three lbs. wire-nails
A few dozen 3-inch and I-1/2-inch screws.

The total cost of the materials will come to about 2 pounds, 2s.


CONSTRUCTION.

The scale drawings are so complete as to dimensions that, assuming the
materials to be of the sizes specified, they may be followed implicitly. It
is, of course, easy to modify the design to suit any slight differences in
dimensions; and to avoid mistakes all the stuff should be gauged carefully
beforehand.

[Illustration:  FIG. 18.-Side of cycle shed.]

The Sides.--When laying out the frames for these it is necessary to bear
in mind that the front upright is somewhat less than 5 feet 6 inches long,
and the back upright rather more than 5 feet, owing to the slope of the
roof, and to the fact that they are set in 2 inches from the back and
front. To get the lengths and angle of the half-joints right, lay the
verticals, which should be 5 feet 6 inches and 5 feet 1 inch long before
trimming, on the floor, at right angles to the bottom of the frame (2 feet
7-3/4 inches long) and quite parallel to one another. (We will assume the
half-joints to have been made at the bottom.) The batten for the top is
laid across the ends of the verticals, its top edge in line with a 5-foot
6-inch mark at a point 2 inches beyond the front vertical, and with a
5-foot mark 2 inches beyond the back vertical, the distances being measured
perpendicularly from the bottom of the frames produced. The lines for the
joints can then be marked, and the joints cut. The notches for the roof
stays should not be cut till the roof is being fitted.

[Illustration:  FIG. 19.--Boards at top of side, fixed ready for cutting
off.]

Use the side frame first made as template for the other.

The shelves are notched at the ends, so that their back faces shall be
flush with the board side of the frame.

Fix the corners with the screws, and plane off the projecting angles of the
uprights.

When putting on the boards, start at the back of the frame. Plane down the
groove edge of the first board until the groove is out of the board, and
apply the board with 1-1/2 inches projecting beyond the frame. Leave a
little spare at each end of every board, and when the side is covered run a
tenon-saw across both ends of all the boards close to the frame, and
finish up with the plane. This is quicker and makes a neater job than
cutting each board to size separately.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.-Back of cycle shed.]

The Back (Fig. 20).--When laying out the frame for this, remember that
there is a bevel to be allowed for along the top, and that the height of
the frame at the front must be that of the back of a side frame. (See Fig.
21.) The boards should be cut off to the same slope.

Twenty-four boards should exactly cover the back. Cut the tongue neatly off
that last fixed, and glue it into the groove of the first board.

The Front.--The frame requires careful making. For details of corner
joints see Fig. 16. The 3-inch faces of the top and bottom bars are
vertical. The upper side of the top bar is planed off to the angle of the
slope. (Fig. 23.)

[Illustration:  FIG. 21. Detail of eaves.]

The Doors (Fig. 22).--These are the most difficult parts to construct, as
the braces which prevent the front edges dropping must be carefully fitted
in order to do their work properly.

The eleven outside boards of each door are held together by two 4-inch
ledges 6 inches away from the ends, and one 5-inch central ledge. Allow a
little "spare" on the boards for truing up. Boards and ledges having been
nailed together, lay a piece of 4 by 1-1/2 inch batten across the ledges on
the line which the braces will take, and mark the ledges accordingly. Next
mark on the batten the ends of the braces. These project half an inch into
the ledges, and terminate on the thrust side in a nose an inch long, square
to the edge of the brace. The obtuse angle is flush with the edge of the
ledge. Cut out the braces, lay them in position on the ledges, and scratch
round the ends. Chisel out the notches very carefully, working just inside
the lines to ensure the brace making a tight fit. If there is any slackness
at either end, the brace obviously cannot carry the weight of the door
until the door has settled slightly, which is just what should be
prevented. Therefore it is worth while taking extra trouble over this part
of the work.

[Illustration:   FIG. 22.-Doors of shed.]

Cautions.--Don't get the nose of the brace too near the end of the ledge.
Nail the boards on specially securely to the ledges near the ends of the
braces.

Fitting the Doors.--The doors should now be laid on the top of the frame
and secured to it by the four hinges. The long ends of these are held by
screws driven through the boards into the bearers; the cross pieces are
screwed to the uprights of the door frame. The doors when closed should
make a good but not tight fit with one another.


PUTTING THE PARTS TOGETHER.

The two sides, front, and back are now assembled, on a level surface, for
drilling the holes for the bolts which hold them together. The positions of
the bolts will be gathered from the drawings. Get the parts quite square
before drilling, and run the holes through as parallel to the sides as
possible. If the bolts are a bit too long, pack washers between nut and
wood until the nut exerts proper pressure.

Caution.--The hole must not be large enough to allow the square part just
under the head to revolve, for in such a case it would be impossible to
screw up the nut. Its size ought to be such as to require the head to be
driven up against the wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 23 Roof attachment]

The Roof.--The boards of this are attached to a frame which fits closely
inside the tops of the sides, back, and front. To get the fit of the frame
correct, it must be made a bit too wide in the first instance, and then be
bevelled off at the front, as shown in Fig. 23, and the reverse way at the
back. The ends are notched for the stays AA, and the frame then tacked
firmly, by driving nails into the sides, etc., below it, in the position
which it will occupy when the roof is on, except that it projects upwards a
little. Cut off twenty-five boards 3 feet 7 inches long. Omitting the end
ones for the present, lay the remainder up to one another in order, their
ends an equal distance from the frame, and nail to the frame. Lift off the
roof, insert and secure AAAA, and nail on the end boards. Then rule
parallel straight lines 3 feet 6 inches apart across all the boards from
end to end of the roof, and cut along these lines. The roof is replaced
after notches have been cut in the tops of the sides to take AAAA, and
secured to the vertical parts by six bolts, the positions of which are
shown in Fig. 24.

[Illustration:
FIG. 24.--Top of cycle shed.
FIG. 25.--Floor of shed.]

The Floor (Fig. 25).--The making of this is so simple a matter that one
need only point out the need for notching the end boards to allow the floor
to touch the sides and back, and the doors when closed. It should be
screwed to the frames, on which it rests, in a few places.

Preserving the Wood.--All outside wood is dressed with stoprot or
creosote, rubbed well into the joints of the boarding.

Felting the Roof.--The felt is cut into 4-foot lengths, and each length
has its ends turned over and nailed to the underside of the roof. The
strips must overlap an inch or two. When the felt is on, dress it with
boiled tar, and sprinkle sand over it while the tar is still liquid.

Fitting.--The two bolts to hold one door top and bottom and the lock are
now fitted, and a couple of hooks screwed into the door frame clear of the
door, to sling a machine from while it is being cleaned or adjusted.

Mounting the Shed.--The shed must be raised a few inches above the
ground, on bricks or other suitable supports. Don't stand it close to a
wall. Air should be able to circulate freely under and all round it.


CUTTING DOWN EXPENSE.

If the cost appears prohibitive, it may be reduced somewhat (1) by using
thinner boards; (2) by reducing the height of the shed by 1 foot. A very
cheap shed, but of course not comparable in quality with the one described,
can be made by using odd rough boards for the outside, and covering them
with roofing felt well tarred.



VIII.  A TARGET APPARATUS FOR RIFLE SHOOTING.

The base is a 1-inch board, 18 inches long and 7 inches wide.

The target-holder is a piece of wood 1-1/2 inches square, and a couple of
inches longer than the side of the largest target to be used. To one face
nail a piece of strip lead as weight; and to the parallel face attach, by
means of brads driven in near one edge, a piece of thin wood of the same
size as the face. The free long edge of this should be chamfered off
slightly on the inside to enable the target to be slipped easily between it
and the roller.

The roller is pivoted on two short spindles--which can be made out of stout
wire nails--driven into the ends near the face farthest from the weight.
(See Fig. 26.)

For standards use a couple of the small angle irons used for supporting
shelves, and sold at about a penny each. These are screwed on to the board
2 inches from what may be considered to be the rear edge, and are so spaced
as to leave room for a washer on each spindle between the roller and the
standards, to diminish friction.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.-Side elevation of disappearing target apparatus.]

Remove one standard, and drive into the roller a piece of stout wire with
its end bent to form an eye. The inclination of the arm to the roller is
shown in Fig. 26.

To the front of the board now nail a rectangle of stout sheet iron, long
and deep enough to just protect the standards and roller. Place the roller
in position, insert a target, and revolve the roller to bring the target
vertical. A small wire stop should now be fixed into the baseboard to
prevent the arm coming farther forward, and a hole for the operating string
be drilled in the protection plate at the elevation of the eye on the
arm. The edges of this hole need careful smoothing off to prevent fraying
of the string. A small eyelet or brass ring soldered into or round the hole
will ensure immunity from chafing.

Drive a couple of long wire nails into the front edge of the board outside
the iron screen to wind the string on when the target is put away.

It may prove a convenience if plain marks are made on the string at the
distances from which shooting will be done.

The above description covers apparatus for working two or more targets
simultaneously on a long roller, or separately on separate rollers mounted
on a common baseboard.

If it is desired to combine with the apparatus a "stop" for the bullets,
the latter (a sheet of stout iron of the requisite strength) may be affixed
to the rear of the baseboard, and furnished with a handle at the top to
facilitate transport.



IX.  CABINET-MAKING.

A Match-box Cabinet.

This is useful for the storage of small articles, such as stamps, pens,
seeds, needles, and a number of other minor things which easily go astray
if put in a drawer with larger objects.

The best boxes for the purpose are those used for the larger Bryant and May
matches. Select only those boxes of which the tray moves easily in the
case.

The cases should be stood on end on some flat surface while being glued
together. A box or drawer with truly square corners is useful for
assembling them in; if they are packed into one corner they cannot slew
about. Press the boxes together while the glue is setting.

Now glue the back ends of the cases (from which the trays should have been
removed), and press them against a piece of thin card. When the glue is
dry, apply some more with a small brush to the back angles inside the
covers, to ensure a good hold on the backing. Trim off the card to the
outline of the pile.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.--Match-box cabinet.]

Select for the front end of the drawer that for which the wood is doubled
over. Paste outside the end a piece of white paper, whereon words and
numbers will be more plainly visible. The life of the trays will be
increased if the insides are neatly lined with thin paper.

For "handles" use boot buttons, or loops of thin brass wire, or brass paper
clips. To give the cabinet a neat appearance you should cover it outside
with paper of some neutral tint; and if you wish it to be stable and not
upset when a rather sticky drawer is pulled out, glue it down to a solid
wooden base of the proper size.


A Cardboard Cabinet.

We now proceed to a more ambitious undertaking--the manufacture of a
cabinet for the storage of note-paper, envelopes, labels, etc. The only
materials needed are some cardboard and glue; the tools, a ruler and a very
sharp knife. For the marking out a drawing board and T-square are
invaluable. The cardboard should be fairly stout, not less than 1/16 inch
thick.

Begin with the drawers; it is easier to make the case fit the drawers than
vice versa.

Mark out the drawers as shown in Fig. 28. The areas AA are the front and
back; BB the sides. The dotted lines indicate the lines along which the
cardboard is bent up. The sides are of exactly the same length as the
bottom, but the front and back are longer than the bottom by twice the
thickness of the cardboard, so as to overlap the sides. (The extra length
is indicated by the heavy black lines.)

[Illustration: FIG. 28.--Drawer of cardboard cabinet marked ready for
cutting.]

Measure and cut out very carefully to ensure all the drawers being of the
same size. Lay a piece of card under the thing cut to avoid blunting the
knife or damaging the table. When the blanks are ready, cut them almost
through along the dotted lines. Use several strokes, and after each stroke
test the stubbornness of the bend. When the card is almost severed it will
bend up quite easily. Note.--Bend as shown in the inset C; not the other
way, or you will snap the card. If you should be so unlucky as to cut the
card through in places, paste a strip of thin paper along the line before
turning up.

The four flaps are now bent up, glued together, and covered outside with
paper. This part of the business is easy enough if a small square-cornered
wooden box be used as a support inside at each angle in turn. It is
advisable to glue strips along all the bends both inside and outside. The
external strips should be flattened down well, so as to offer no loose
edges.

Compare the drawers, and if one is slightly wider than the rest, use it to
guide you in making the measurements for the case.

The sides and back of the case are cut out of a single piece. The sides
should be a quarter of an inch deeper than the drawers to allow some
overlap; the back slightly wider than the drawer.

As each drawer will be separated from that above it by a shelf, allowance
must be made for the shelves, and also for a twentieth of an inch or so of
"play" to each drawer. To keep on the safe side leave a little extra stuff
to be removed later on.

Cut out the bottom to fit inside the back and sides exactly, and a
sufficient number of shelves of precisely the same size as the bottom.
Attach the bottom to the sides and back with internal and external strips.
When the glue has set, place the guide drawer in position, and lay on it a
piece of thin card to cover it over. This card is merely a removable
"spacer." Along the side and back edges of the shelf stick projecting
strips of stout paper. When the adhesive is dry, turn the strips round the
end at right angles to the division, glue them outside, and lay the
division in position on top of the "spacer."

Place the second drawer and shelf in like manner, and continue till the top
of the cabinet is reached. Then mark off and cut away any superfluous card.
Glue the top edges, and stand the cabinet head downwards on a piece of
cardboard. Trim off the edges of this, and the top is completed, except for
binding the corners.

Then attend to the outside back corners of the case, and paste strips in
the angles under the shelves. The strips should be forced well into the
angles.

For handles use brass rings let sufficiently far through the fronts of the
drawers for a wedge of card to be slipped through them and stuck in
position. The appearance of the cabinet will be enhanced by a neatly
applied covering of paper.


A Cigar-box Cabinet.

At the rate of a halfpenny or less apiece one may buy the cigar boxes made
to hold twenty-five cigars. These boxes, being fashioned by machinery, are
all--at any rate all those devoted to a particular "brand"--of the same
dimensions; they are neatly constructed, and their wood is well seasoned.
Anyone who wishes to make a useful little cabinet may well employ the boxes
as drawers in the said cabinet (Fig. 29).

Each box should be prepared as follows:-Remove the lid and paper lining,
and rub all the paper binding off the outside angles with a piece of coarse
glass paper. This is a safer method than soaking-off, which may cause
warping and swelling of the wood. Then plane down the tops of the two sides
till they are flush with the back and front, and glue into the corners
small pieces of wood of right-angled-triangle section to hold the sides
together and the bottom to the sides. To secure the parts further cut a
number of large pins down to 3/4 inch, and drive these into the sides
through holes carefully drilled in the bottom. Finally, rub the outside of
the drawer well with fine glass paper or emery cloth till the surface is
smooth all over.

The Case.--If mahogany can be obtained for this, so much the better, as
the wood will match the boxes. In default of it, a white wood, stained,
will have to serve.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--Cabinet with cigar-box drawers.]

The two sides of the case should be prepared first Wood 3/8 inch thick is
advised. Each side is 1 inch wider than the depth (outside) of a drawer
from front to back. (Whether the drawers shall slide in lengthways or
flatways is for the maker to decide.) The length of a side is calculated on
the basis that the drawers will be separated from one another by runners
1/4 to 5/16 inch deep, and that a slight clearance must be allowed for the
drawers to slide in and out freely. In the first instance cut the sides a
bit too long. If it be preferred to insert the bottom between the sides,
the length must be increased accordingly.

The runners are cut out of the box lids, and planed till their top and
bottom edges are parallel. Their length is 1/4 inch less than the depth of
a drawer. To fill up the spaces between the drawers in front you will need
some slips of the same depth as the runners, and 3/8 inch longer than the
drawer, so that they may be let 3/16 inch into the sides of the case at
each end.

Affixing the Runners.--This is a very easy matter if a wooden spacer,
slightly wider than the depth of the drawer, is prepared. Having decided
which is to be the inside face and the forward edge of a side, lay the side
flat, and apply the spacer with one edge flush with the bottom of the side,
or as far away from it as the thickness of the bottom, as the case may be,
and fix it lightly in position with a couple of tacks. The first runner is
laid touching the spacer and a little back from the edge to give room for
the cross-bar, and fastened by means of short tacks, for which holes had
better be drilled in the runner to prevent splitting. The spacer is now
transferred to the other side of the runner, and the second runner is
fastened on above it; and so on till all the runners are in position. The
square should be used occasionally to make sure that the tops of the
runners are parallel to one another. The other side having been treated in
like manner, any spare wood at the top is sawn off.

The notches for the front cross-bars between drawers are cut out with a
very sharp narrow chisel.

The Top and Bottom.--Make the top of the same thickness as the sides; the
bottom of somewhat stouter wood. If the bottom is cut a bit longer than the
width of the case, and neatly bevelled off, it will help to smarten the
appearance of the cabinet.

When fixing the sides to the bottom and top get the distance correct by
placing the top and bottom drawers in position, and insert a piece of thin
card between one end of the drawer and the side. This will ensure the
necessary clearance being allowed for.

The Back.--Cut this out of thin wood. The top of a sweetstuff box-costing
about a halfpenny--will do well enough. It should be quite rectangular
and make a close fit, as it plays the important part of keeping the case
square laterally. Bevel its back edges off a bit. Push it in against the
back ends of the runners, and fix it by picture brads driven in behind.

The front bars should now be cut to a good fit and glued in the notches.
This completes the construction.

Drop handles for the drawers may be made out of semicircles of brass wire
with the ends turned up. The handles are held up to the drawer by loops of
finer wire passed through the front and clinched inside.

The finishing of the outside must be left to the maker's taste. Varnishing,
or polishing with warmed beeswax, will add to the general appearance, and
keep out damp.

The total cost of a ten-drawer cabinet ought not to exceed eighteen pence.


A Tool Cabinet.

The wooden cabinet shown in Fig. 30 is constructed, as regards its case, in
the same way as that just described, but the drawers are built up of
several pieces. The over-all dimensions of the cabinet represented are as
follows: Height, including plinth, 25 inches; width, 17-3/8 inches; depth,
10-1/2 inches. The drawers are 16 inches wide (outside), by 10-1/8 inches
from back to front, and, reckoning from the bottom upwards, are 3-1/4, 3,
2-1/2, 2, 2, 2, 2, and 1-3/4 inches deep.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.--Large cabinet (a), details of drawer joints (b,
c, d), and padlock fastening (e).]

The construction of the drawers is indicated by the diagrams, Fig. 30, b,
c, d. The fronts are of 5/8-inch, the sides and backs of 3/8-inch, and the
bottoms of (barely) 1/4-inch wood. The grooves should not come nearer than
1/8-inch to the bottom edge, or be more than 5/16 inch wide and deep. The
possessor of a suitable "plough" plane will have no difficulty in cutting
them out; in the absence or such a tool the cutting gauge and chisel must
be used.

The back piece of a drawer has 1/4-inch less height than the front, to
allow the bottom to be introduced. The ends or the bottom are bevelled off
towards the top edge to fit the grooves, so that no part may be above the
grooves.

Glue should be used to attach the sides of a drawer to the back and front
in the first place, and nails be added when the glue has set. As an aid to
obtaining perfect squareness, without which the drawers will fit badly, it
is advisable to mark out on a board a rectangle having the exact inside
dimensions of a drawer, and to nail strips of wood up to the lines on the
inside. If the parts are put together round this template they will
necessarily fit squarely.

Divisions.--If the drawers are to be subdivided in one direction only,
the partitions should run preferably from back to front, as this enables
the contents of a compartment to be more easily seen. Where two-direction
division is needed the partitions are cut as shown in Fig. 31. All
partitions should touch the bottom, and be made immovable by gluing or
nailing. It is a mistake to have so many divisions in a drawer that the
fingers cannot get into them easily.

Wooden knobs for the drawers can be bought very cheaply of any turner, or
suitable brass knobs at any ironmonger's. Take care that the knobs are in
line with one another; otherwise the general appearance of the cabinet will
suffer.

[Illustration: FIG. 31.--Divisions of drawer notched to cross each
other.]

Lock and Key.--If a cabinet is intended for storage of articles of any
value it should be provided with lock and key. One lock will secure all the
drawers if attached to a flap hinged on one side to the cabinet, as shown
in Fig. 30 a, to engage a catch projecting from one of the drawers. A
special form of lock is sold for the purpose. If the single flap seems to
give a lop-sided effect, place a fellow on the other side, and fit it with
sunk bolts to shoot into the overhanging top and plinth. If you wish to
avoid the expense and trouble of fitting a lock, substitute a padlock and a
staple clinched through the front of a drawer and passing through a slot in
the flap (Fig. 30, e).

Alternative Method.--The fixing of the front bars can be avoided if the
front of each drawer (except the lowest) be made to overhang the bottom by
the depth of the runner. This method, of course, makes it impossible to
stand a drawer level on a level surface.



X.  TELEGRAPHIC APPARATUS.

The easily made but practical apparatus described in this chapter supplies
an incentive for learning the Morse telegraphic code, which is used for
sending sound signals, and for visible signals transmitted by means of
flags, lamps, and heliograph mirrors. Signalling is so interesting, and on
occasion can be so useful, that no apology is needed for introducing
signalling apparatus into this book.

The apparatus in question is a double-instrument outfit, which enables an
operator at either end of the line to cause a "buzzer" or "tapper" to work
at the other end when he depresses a key and closes an electric circuit.
Each unit consists of three main parts--(1) the transmitting key; (2) the
receiving buzzer or tapper; (3) the electric battery.

The principles of an installation are shown in Fig. 33. One unit only is
illustrated, but, as the other is an exact duplicate, the working of the
system will be followed easily.

[Illustration: Fig. 32.--Morse alphabet]

A wooden lever, L, is pivoted on a support, A. Passing through it at the
forward end is a metal bar having at the top a knob, K, which can be
grasped conveniently in the fingers; at the other a brass screw, O, which
is normally pulled down against the contact, N, by the spiral spring, S.
The contact M under K is in connection with the binding post T1 and N with
binding post T3; K is joined up to T2, and O to T4.

T3 and T4 are connected with one of the line wires; T1 with the other wire
through a battery, B; T3 with the other wire through the buzzer, R. [1]

[Footnote 1: For the buzzer may be substituted the tapper, described on a
later page.]

Assuming both keys to be at rest, as in Fig. 33, the two buzzers are
evidently in circuit with the line wires, though no current is passing. If
the stem of K is depressed to make contact with M, the electric circuit of
which the battery, B, forms part is completed, and the buzzer at the other
end of the lines comes into action. Since the depression of K raises O off
N, the "home" buzzer's connection with the line wires is broken, to prevent
the current being short-circuited. The fact that this buzzer is
periodically in circuit, even when the key is being worked, makes it
possible for the operator at the other end to attract attention by
depressing his key, if he cannot read the signals sent.

[Illustration: Fig.33--Telegraphic apparatus; sending key, buzzer and
battery]


Making the Keys.

Transmitting keys can be bought cheaply, but not so cheaply as they can be
made. The only expense entailed in home manufacture is that of the screw
terminals for connecting the keys with the lines and buzzers. These cost
only a penny each, and, if strict economy is the order of the day, can be
dispensed with should the apparatus not have to be disconnected frequently.

The size of the key is immaterial. The keys made by me have levers 1 inch
wide and 5-1/2 inches long, oak being chosen as material, on account of its
toughness. K is in each case a small wooden knob on a piece of 3/16-inch
brass rod; O a 1-1/2-inch brass screw; A a piece of sheet brass 3-1/2
inches long, marked off carefully, drilled 1/8 inch from the centre of each
end for the pivot screws, and in four places for the holding-down screws,
and bent up at the ends to form two standards. If you do not possess any
brass strip, the lever may be supported on wooden uprights glued and
screwed to the base.

[Illustration: Fig. 34--Telegraphic apparatus mounted on baseboard]

Contact M is a small piece of brass attached to the base by a screw at one
end and by T1 at the other. K was drilled near the end to take the short
coil of insulated wire joining it to T2, and O was similarly connected with
T4.

The spring, S, should be fairly strong. A steel spiral with a loop at each
end is most easily fitted. Drill holes in the lever and base large enough
for the spring to pass through freely, make a small cross hole through the
lever hole for a pin, and cut a slot across the base hole for a pin to hold
the bottom of the spring. Adjust the lever by means of screw O so that
there is a space of about 1/4-inch between K and M when O and N are in
contact, and after the spring has been put in position give the screw a
turn or two to bring K down to within 1/16 inch of M. This will put the
required tension on the spring.

The Buzzers.--For these I selected a couple of small electric bells,
costing 2s. 6d. each. Their normal rate of vibration being much too slow
for telegraphic purposes, I cut off the hammers to reduce the inertia, and
so adjusted the contact screw that the armature had to move less than one
hundredth of  an inch to break the circuit. This gave so high a rate of
vibration that the key could not make and break the circuit quickly enough
to prevent the buzzer sounding.


A Morse Tapper or Sounder.

In postal telegraph offices a "sounder," and not a "buzzer," is generally
used to communicate the signals. Instead of a continuous noise, lasting as
long as the key at the transmitting station is held down, the operator at
the receiving station hears only a series of taps made by an instrument
called a "sounder." The principle of this simple device is illustrated by
the working diagrams in Fig. 35. M is a horseshoe magnet fixed to a base,
A. Close to it is an armature, AR, of soft iron, attached to a lever, L,
which works on a pivot and is held up against a regulating screw, P1, by
the pull of the spring SP. When current passes through the magnet the
armature is attracted, and the point of the screw S2 strikes against P2;
while the breaking of the circuit causes L to fly back against S1. The time
intervening between the "down" and "up" clicks tells the operator whether a
long or a short--dash or a dot--is being signalled.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.-Elevation and plan of telegraphic sounder.]

Materials.--A horseshoe magnet and armature taken from an electric bell
provide the most essential parts of our home-made instrument in a cheap
form. If these are available, expense will be limited to a few pence. Oak
or walnut are the best woods to use for the lever, being more resonant than
the softer woods, and for the standard B and stop V. Any common wood is
good enough for the base A.

The lever L is 6 inches long, 1/2 inch deep, and 3/8-inch wide, and is
pivoted at a point 4-1/4 inches from the stop end. The hole should be bored
through it as squarely as possible, so that it may lie centrally without B
being out of the square. A piece of metal is screwed to its top face under
the adjusting screw S1.

The spring is attached to L and A in the manner already described on p. 89
in connection with the "buzzer."

The plate P2 should be stout enough not to spring under the impact of the
lever. Fig. 36 is an end view of the standard B. The drilling of the pivot
hole through this requires care. The screw S2 should be so adjusted as to
prevent the armature actually touching the cores of the magnets when
attracted. The ends of the magnet winding wire, after being scraped, are
clipped tightly against the base by the binding posts T1 T2.

If sounders are used in place of buzzers they are connected up with the
keys, batteries, and line wires in the manner shown in Fig. 33.


Batteries.

The dry cells used for electric bells are the most convenient batteries to
use. They can now be purchased at all prices from a shilling upwards, and
give about 1-1/2 volts when in good condition. One cell at each end will
suffice for short distances, or for considerable distances if large
conductors are used. If a single cell fails to work the buzzer strongly
through the circuit, another cell must be added.

[Illustration: FIG. 36.--Standard for sounder.]

For ease in transport it will be found advisable to mount key, buzzer, and
battery on a common baseboard, which should be provided with a cover and
handle. The three parts are interconnected with one another, and the line
wire terminals as sketched in Fig. 34. This arrangement makes the apparatus
very compact and self-contained. As a finishing touch fit the lid inside
with clips for holding a stiff-backed writing pad and pencil for the
recording of messages.

Lines.--Fencing made of stout galvanized iron wires strung on wooden
posts supplies excellent conductors for practice purposes, provided the
posts be quite dry. In wet weather there will be leakage. (Fencing with
metal posts is, of course, unsuitable, as every post short-circuits the
current.) The two wires selected for land lines must be scraped quite
bright at the points where the connections are to be made.

It is an easy matter to rig up a telegraph line of galvanized wire 1/12 to
1/8 inch in diameter, strung along insulators (the necks of bottles serve
the purpose excellently) supported on trees, posts, or rough poles. The
length of the line will be limited by the battery power available, but a
6-volt battery at each end will probably suffice for all experimental
purposes. A second wire is not needed if one terminal at each end is
connected with a copper plate sunk in the ground, or with a metal fence,
drain-pipe, etc.



XI. A RECIPROCATING ELECTRIC MOTOR.

The electric motor to be treated in this chapter illustrates very prettily
the attractive force of a hollow, wire-wound bobbin on a movable core, when
the electric current is passed through the wire. If one inserts the end of
an iron rod into the coil, the coil exerts a pull upon it, and this pull
will cease only when the centre of the rod is opposite the centre of the
coil. This principle is used in the "electric gun," which in its simplest
form is merely a series of powerful coils arranged one behind another on a
tube through which an iron or steel projectile can pass. The projectile
closes automatically the circuit of each coil in turn just before reaching
it, and breaks it before its centre is halfway through the coil, being thus
passed along from one coil to the other with increasing velocity.

Our motor is essentially a very inefficient one, its energy being small for
the current used, as compared with a revolving motor of the usual kind. But
it has the advantage of being very easy to make.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.--Electric reciprocating engine and battery.]

How it works.--The experimental engine, constructed in less than a couple
of hours, which appears in Fig. 38, consists of a coil, C, strapped down by
a piece of tin to a wooden bedplate; a moving plunger, P, mounted on a
knitting-needle slide rod, SR; a wire connecting rod, SR; a wooden crank,
K; and a piece of knitting-needle for crank shaft, on which are mounted a
small eccentric brass wipe, W, and a copper collar, D. Against D presses a
brass brush, B1 connected with the binding post, T1; while under W is a
long strip of springy brass against which W presses during part of every
revolution. T2 is connected to one end of the coil winding, and T1 through
a 4-volt accumulator or three dry cells, with the other end of the coil.
When W touches B2 the circuit is completed, and the coil draws in the
plunger, the contact being broken before the plunger gets home. The crank
rotates at a very high speed if there is plenty of battery power, all the
moving parts appearing mere blurs.


CONSTRUCTION.

The coil is made by winding 4 oz. of  No. 32 cotton-covered wire (price 6d.
to 8d.) on a boxwood reel 2 inches long and 1-1/2 inches in diameter, with
a 9/16-inch central hole. Before winding, bore a hole for the wire through
one end of the reel, near the central part, and mount the reel on a lathe
or an improvised spindle provided with a handle of some kind. The wire
should be uncoiled and wound on some circular object, to ensure its paying
out regularly without kinking; which makes neat winding almost impossible.

Draw a foot of the wire through the hole in the reel, and drive in a tiny
peg--which must not protrude inwards--to prevent it slipping. Lay the
turns on carefully, forcing them into close contact, so that the next layer
may have a level bed. On reaching the end of the layer, be equally careful
to finish it neatly before starting back again. When the wire is all on,
bore a hole as near the edge of the finishing edge as possible, and draw
the spare wire through. Then cut a strip of tough paper of the width of the
coils, coat one side with paste, and wrap it tightly round the outside to
keep the wire in place.

Note.--Insulation will be improved if every layer of wire is painted over
with shellac dissolved in alcohol before the next layer is applied.

Flatten the reel slightly with a file at the points of contact with the
baseboard, to prevent rolling.

The plunger is a tube of thin iron, 1/16 inch less in diameter than the
hole in the reel, and 1/4 inch longer than the reel. If a ready-made tube
is not available, construct one by twisting a piece of tin round a metal
rod, and soldering the joint. As it is difficult to make a jointed tube
cylindrical, and a close fit is needed to give good results, it is worth
going to a little trouble to get a plunger of the right kind.

The ends of the plunger are plugged with wood and bored centrally for the
slide rod, which should not be cut to its final length until the parts are
assembled.

The crank shaft is 2-3/4 inches of a stout knitting needle mounted in a
sheet brass bearing. The crank, a fragment of oak or other tough wood, is
balanced, and has a throw of 5/8 inch. The crank-shaft hole should be a
trifle small, so that the crank shall get a tight hold of the shaft without
pinning. The collar, D, and wipe, W, are soldered to the shaft after this
has been passed through its bearings. The brush B1 should press firmly, but
not unnecessarily so, against the collar. For B2 one must use very springy
brass strip, a piece about 3 inches long and 1/4 inch wide being needed.
Bend it to the arc of a large circle, and screw one end down to the base by
the binding screw T2. The other end, which should not touch the base, is
confined by the heads of a couple of small screws, by means of which the
strip is adjusted relatively to the wipe.

Fixing the Coil.--Cut a strip of tin 1-3/4 inches wide and 4 inches long.
Punch a couple of holes near one end, and nail this to the side of the
base, with its forward end 4-1/4 inches from the crank shaft. Pass the
strip over the coil, and bend it down towards the base. Drill a couple of
screw holes, and screw the other end down so that the coil is gripped
fairly tight.

Fixing the Plunger. Two small guides, G1 G2, are made for the plunger. The
holes through which the slide rod moves should be a good fit, and their
centres at the level of the centre of the coil. Screw holes are bored in
the feet.

Pass the plunger through the coil, and place the guides on the rod. Then
draw the plunger forward till 1/2 inch projects. Bring G1 close up to it,
mark its position, and screw it to the base. The other guide, G2, should be
1-1/2 inches away from the rear of the coil.

[Illustration: Fig. 38.--Plan of electric reciprocating engine.]

The coil and guides must be adjusted so that the plunger does not touch the
coil anywhere during a stroke, packings being placed, if necessary, under
coil or guides. When the adjustment is satisfactory, screw the coil down
tightly, and cut off any superfluous parts of the rod.

The Connecting Rod.--Bore a hole near the end of the plunger for a screw
to hold the rear end of the connecting rod. Pull the plunger out till 1-3/4
inches project, turn the crank full forward, and measure off the distance
between the centres of the plunger hole and the crank pin. Drive a couple
of wire nails into a board, and twist the ends of a piece of 1/20-inch wire
round them twice. This wire constitutes a connecting rod amply strong
enough to stand the pulls to which it will be subjected. Fix the rod in
position.

Adjusting the Wipe.--Turn the wipe, W, round until it makes contact with
B2, and, holding the crank shaft with a pair of pliers, twist the crank on
it till it just begins the return stroke. Then turn the crank to find out
how long the wipe remains in contact, and adjust the crank relatively to
the wipe so that the crank is vertical when the period of contact is half
finished. The length of this period is controlled by the set screws at the
free end of B2.


OTHER DETAILS.

The fly wheel may be a disc of wood.

Oil all the rubbing parts slightly. Connect T1 to one terminal of the
battery, T2 to the coil, and the other terminal of the battery to the coil.
Set the engine going. If it refuses to run, make sure that B1 is pressing
against D. The speed of the engine may possibly be improved by careful
adjustment of B2 and an alteration in the setting of the crank, and will
certainly be accelerated by increasing the number of battery cells.

The cost of the engine described was about 1s, 3d., exclusive of the
battery.



XII.  AN ELECTRIC ALARM CLOCK.

Anybody who possesses an alarm clock with an external gong, an electric
bell, and a battery, may easily make them combine to get the drowsiest of
mortals out of bed on the chilliest of winter mornings. The arrangement has
as its secondary advantages and capabilities--

(l) That the clock can be placed where its ticking will not disturb the
person whom it has to arouse in due course (some of the cheaper clocks are
very self-advertising);

(2) That one clock can be made to operate any number of bells in different
parts of the house.

The main problem to be solved is, how to make the alarm mechanism of the
clock complete an electric circuit when the alarm "goes off."

If you examine an alarm clock of the type described, you will find that the
gong hammer lies against the gong when at rest, and that its shaft when in
motion vibrates to and fro about a quarter of an inch.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.--Plan of release gear of electric alarm, as
attached to clock.]

Fig. 39 shows a. method of utilizing the movement of the hammer. A piece of
wood, 2 inches long, wide enough to fill the space between the rear edge of
the clock and the hammer slot, and 1/2 inch thick, has its under side
hollowed out to the curvature of the clock barrel. This block serves as a
base for two binding posts or terminals, T1  T2. A vertical slit is made in
T1 and in this is soldered [to] one end of a little piece of spring brass
strip, 1 inch long and 1/4 inch wide. To the back of the other end of the
strip solder a piece of 1/20 inch wire, projecting l inch below the strip.
The strip must be bent so that it presses naturally against T2. A little
trigger, B, which you can cut out of sheet brass, is pivoted at a, where it
must be raised off the base by a small washer. It projects 1/4 inch beyond
the base on the gong support side. A square nick is cut in it at such a
distance from a that, when the wire spike on C is in the nick, the strip is
held clear of T2. The other end of the trigger, when the trigger is set,
must be 1/8 inch from the shank of the alarm hammer--at any rate not so
far away that the hammer, when it vibrates, cannot release C from the nick.

To fix the base on to the top of the clock, the works must be removed
(quite an easy matter to accomplish) and holes bored for a couple of screws
put through from the inside. If the underside of the base is not quite
correctly curved, take care not to force in the screws far enough to
distort the barrel. It is advisable to do the fitting of the parts of the
release after the base has been fixed, and before the works are replaced.
The position of the hammer shaft can be gauged accurately enough from the
slot in the case.

The tails of the terminals T1 T2 must be truncated sufficiently not to
penetrate the base and make contact with the barrel, or a "short circuit"
will be evident as soon as the battery is connected up.

[Illustration: Fig. 40.--Electric alarm releaser, as attached to separate
wooden clock casing.]

If the bell, battery, and clock are in the same room, a single dry cell
will give sufficient current; but if the circuit is a long one, or several
bells have to be operated, two or more cells will be required.

An Alternative Arrangement.--Should the reader prefer to have the clock
quite free from the release--and this is certainly convenient for winding
and setting the alarm--he should make a little wooden case for the clock
to stand in, just wide enough to take the clock, and the back just as high
as the top of the barrel. The release is then attached to a little platform
projecting from the back, care being taken that the lever is arranged in
the correct position relatively to the hammer when the clock is pushed back
as far as it will go (Fig. 40).

If a self-contained outfit is desired, make the case two-storied: the upper
division for the clock, the lower for the cell or cells. The bell may be
attached to the front. A hinged fretwork front to the clock chamber, with
an opening the size of the face; a door at the back of the cell chamber;
and a general neat finish, staining and polishing, are refinements that
some readers may like to undertake.

Setting the Alarm.--A good many alarm clocks are not to be relied upon to
act within a quarter of an hour or so of the time to which they are set.
But absolute accuracy of working may be obtained if the clock hands are
first set to the desired hour, and the alarm dial hand revolved slowly till
the alarm is released. The hands are then set at the correct time, and the
alarm fully wound.



XIII. A MODEL ELECTRIC RAILWAY.

The rapid increase in the number of electrically worked railways, and the
substitution of the electric for the steam locomotive on many lines, give
legitimate cause for wondering whether, twenty or so years hence, the
descendants of the "Rocket" will not have disappeared from all the railways
of the world, excepting perhaps those of transcontinental character.

[Illustration: Fig. 41.--Electric Locomotive.]

The change is already spreading to model plant, and not without good
reason, as the miniature electric railway possesses decided advantages of
its own. Instead of having to chase the locomotive to stop or reverse it,
one merely has to press a button or move a switch. The fascinations of a
model steam locomotive, with its furnace, hissing of steam, business-like
puffings, and a visible working of piston and connecting rods, are not to
be denied, any more than that a full-sized steam locomotive is a more
imposing object at rest or in motion than its electric rival. On the other
hand, the ease of control already noticed, and the absence of burning fuel,
water leakage, smoke and fumes, are strong points in favour of the electric
track, which does no more harm to a carpet than to a front lawn, being
essentially clean to handle. Under the head of cost the electric locomotive
comes out well, as motors can be purchased cheaply; and connecting them up
with driving wheels is a much less troublesome business than the
construction of an equally efficient steamer. One may add that the electric
motor is ready to start at a moment's notice: there is no delay
corresponding to that caused by the raising of steam.


The Track

We will consider this first, as its design must govern, within certain
limits, the design of the locomotive. There are three systems of electrical
transmission available.

1. The trolley system, with overhead cable attached to insulators on posts,
to carry the current one way, the rails being used as the "return." This
system has the disadvantages associated with a wire over which the human
foot may easily trip with disastrous effect.

2. That in which one of the wheel rails is used for taking the current to
the motor, and the other as the return. The objection to the system is that
the wheels must be insulated, to prevent short circuiting; and this,
besides causing trouble in construction, makes it impossible to use the
ordinary model rolling stock. To its credit one may place the fact that
only two rails are needed.

3. The third and, we think, best system, which has an insulated third rail
as one half of the circuit, and both wheel rails as the return, the motor
being kept in connection with the third rail by means of a collector
projecting from the frame and pressing against the top of the third rail.
The last, for reasons of convenience, is placed between the wheel rails. We
will assume that this system is to be employed.

[Illustration: FIG. 42.--Details of rails for electric track.]

Gauge.--For indoor and short tracks generally it is advisable to keep the
gauge narrow, so that sharp curves may be employed without causing undue
friction between rails and wheels. In the present instance we specify a
2-inch gauge, for which, as also for 1-1/2 and 1-1/4 inch, standard
rolling stock is supplied by the manufacturers.

Track Construction.--It is essential that the centre rail and at least
one of the wheel rails shall have all joints bonded together to give a
clear course to the electric current, and the centre rail must be insulated
to prevent leakage and short-circuiting. Where a track is laid down more or
less permanently, the bonding is most positively effected by means of
little fish-plates, screwed into the sides of the abutting rails; but in
the case of a track which must be capable of quick coupling-up and
uncoupling, some such arrangement as that shown in Fig. 42 is to be
recommended.

Fig. 42 (a) is a cross vertical section of the track; Fig. 42 (c) a
longitudinal view; while Fig. 42 (b) shows in plan a point of junction of
two lengths of rail.

The wheel rails are made of carefully straightened brass strip 3/8 inch
wide and 1/16 inch thick, sunk rather more than 1/8 inch into wooden
sleepers (Fig. 42, a), 3-1/2 inches long and 3/4 inch wide (except at
junctions). The sleepers  are prepared most quickly by cutting out a strip
of wood 3-1/2 inches wide in the direction of the grain, and long enough to
make half a dozen sleepers. Two saw cuts are sunk into the top, 2 inches
apart, reckoning from the inside edges, to the proper depth, and the wood
is then subdivided along the grain. The saw used should make a cut slightly
narrower than the strip, to give the wood a good hold. If the cut is
unavoidably too large, packings of tin strip must be forced in with the
rail on the outside. To secure the rails further, holes are bored in them
on each side of the sleeper (see Fig. 42, c), and fine iron or, brass wire
is passed through these, round the bottom of the sleeper, and made fast.

[Illustration: FIG. 43.--Tin chair for centre rail of electric track.]

The centre rail is soldered to small tin chairs, the feet of which are
pinned down to the sleepers. The top of the rails must project slightly
above the chairs, so that the current collector may not be fouled.

Junctions.--At these points one 3/4-inch sleeper is reduced to 1/2-inch
width, and the other increased to 1 inch, this sleeper being overlapped 3/8
inch by the rails of the other section. To the outsides of the wheel rails
are soldered the little angle plates, AA, BB, attached to the sleepers by
brass tacks, which project sufficiently to take the brass wire hooks. These
hooks must be of the right length to pull upon the tacks in AA and make a
good contact. The centre rails are bonded by two strips of springy brass,
riveted to one section, and forced apart at their free end by the
interposed strip. Two pins projecting from the narrower sleeper fit into
holes in the wider to keep the sections in line at a junction.

General.--The sleepers of straight sections are screwed down to 3/4 by
1/4 inch longitudinals, which help to keep the track straight and prevent
the sleepers slipping. Sections should be of the same length and be
interchangeable. Make straight sections of the greatest convenient length,
to reduce the number of junctions. Sleepers need not be less than 6 inches
apart. Fix the sleepers on the longitudinals before hammering the rails
into the slots.

[Illustration: FIG. 44.--Laying out a curve for electric track.]

Curves.--A simple method of laying out a semi-circular curve is shown in
Fig. 44. Sleepers and longitudinals are replaced by 1/2-inch boards, 8
inches wide. Three pieces, about 32 inches long each, have their ends
bevelled off at an angle of 60 degrees, and are laid with their ends
touching. Two semi-circles of 24 and 22 inch radius are drawn on the boards
to indicate the positions of the rails, and short decapitated brass nails
are driven in on each side of a rail, about an inch apart, as it is laid
along one of these lines. (See Fig. 44. A.) The inside nails must not
project sufficiently to catch the wheel flanges. The spring of the brass
will prevent the rail falling out of place, but to make sure, it should be
tied in with wire at a few points. The centre rail should on the curves
also be 3/8 inch deep, and raised slightly above the bed so as to project
above the wheel rails. The method already described of bonding at joints
will serve equally well on curves. If the outer rail is super-elevated
slightly, there will be less tendency for the rolling stock to jump the
track when rounding the curve.

When the rails are in place the boards may be cut with a pad-saw to curves
corresponding with the breadth of the track on the straight. If the boards
incline to warp, screw some pieces of 1/8-inch strip iron to the under side
across the grain, sinking the iron in flush with the wood.

The brass strip for the rails costs about one penny per foot run. Iron
strip is much cheaper, but if it rusts, as it is very likely to do, the
contact places will need constant brightening.

Points.--Fig. 45 shows the manner of laying out a set of points, and
connecting up the rails. The outside wheel rails, it will be seen, are
continuous, and switching is effected by altering the position of the
moving tongues, pivoted at PP, by means of the rod R, which passes through
a hole in the continuous rail to a lever or motor of the same reversible
type as is used for the locomotive. If a motor is employed, R should be
joined to a crank pin on the large driven cog--corresponding to that
affixed to the driving wheel (Fig. 47)--by a short rod. The pin is situated
at such a distance from the axle of the cog wheel that a quarter of a
revolution suffices to move the points over. The points motor must, of
course, have its separate connections with the "central station." To show
how the points lie, the rod R also operates a semaphore with a double arm
(Fig. 46), one end of which is depressed--indicating that the track on that
side is open--when the other is horizontal, indicating "blocked." The arms
point across the track.

[Illustration: FIG. 45.--Points for electric railway.]

Details.--The tongues must be bevelled off to a point on the sides
respectively nearest to the continuous rails. The parts AA are bent out at
the ends to make guides, which, in combination with the safety rails, will
prevent the wheels jumping the track. Care should be taken to insulate
centre rail connecting wires where they pass through or under the wheel
rails.

It is advisable to lay out a set of points, together with motor and
signals, on a separate board.

[Illustration: Fig. 46.--Double-armed signal, operated by points.]

Preservation of Track.--All the wooden parts of an outdoor track should
be well creosoted before use.


The Electric Locomotive.

An elevation and a plan of this are given in Fig. 47. The two pairs of
wheels are set close together, so that they may pass easily round curves.

[Illustration: Fig. 47.--Plan and elevation of electric locomotive.]

The Motor.--A motor of ordinary type, with electro field magnets, is
unsuitable for traction, as it cannot be reversed by changing the direction
of the current, unless a special and rather expensive type of automatic
switch be used. While a motor of this kind is, in conjunction with such a
switch, the most efficient, the motor with permanent field magnets is
preferable as regards cost and ease of fixing. It can be reversed through
the rails. The armature or revolving part must be tripolar to be
self-starting in all positions.

A motor of sufficient power can be bought for half a crown or less--in any
case more cheaply than it can be made by the average amateur.

The motor used for the locomotive illustrated was taken to pieces, and the
magnet M screwed to a strip of wood 1-5/8 inches wide; and for the original
armature bearings were substituted a couple of pieces of brass strip, HH,
screwed to two wooden supports, SS, on the base, E (Fig. 47, a). It was
found necessary to push the armature along the spindle close to the
commutator piece, C, and to shorten the spindle at the armature end and
turn it down to the size of the original bearing, in order to bring the
motor within the space between the wheels.

The place of the small pulley was taken by an 8-toothed pinion wheel,
engaging with a pinion soldered to the near driving wheel, the diameter of
which it exceeded by about 3/16 inch. The pair, originally parts of an old
clock purchased for a few pence, gave a gearing-down of about 9 times.

The position of the driven wheels relatively to the armature must be found
experimentally. There is plenty of scope for adjustment, as the wheels can
be shifted in either direction longitudinally, while the distance between
wheel and armature centres may be further modified in the length of the
bearings, BE. These last are pieces of brass strip turned up at the ends,
and bored for axles, and screwed to the under side of the base. To prevent
the axles sliding sideways and the wheels rubbing the frame, solder small
collars to them in contact with the inner side of the bearings.

The Frame.--Having got the motor wheels adjusted, shorten E so that it
projects 2 inches beyond the centres of the axles at each end. Two cross
bars, GG, 3-1/2 inches long, are then glued to the under side of E,
projecting 1/8 inch. To these are glued two 3/8-inch strips, FF, of the
same length as E. A buffer beam, K, is screwed to G. A removable cover,
abedfg,  is made out of cigar-box wood or tin. The ends rest on GG; the
sides on FF. Doors and windows are cut out, and handrails, etc., added to
make the locomotive suggest the real thing--except for the proportionate
size and arrangement of the wheels.

Electrical Connections.--The current collector, CR, should be well turned
up at the end, so as not to catch on the centre rail joints, and not press
hard enough on the rail to cause noticeable resistance. The fixed end of CR
is connected through T2 with one brush, B, and both wheel bearings with T1.

[Illustration: FIG. 48.--Reversing switch.]

Electrical Fittings.--The best source of power to use is dry cells giving
1-1/2 to 2 volts each. These can be bought at 1s. apiece in fairly large
sizes. Four or five connected in series will work quite a long line if the
contacts are in good condition.

A reversing switch is needed to alter the direction of the current flow.
The construction of one is an exceedingly simple matter. Fig. 48 gives a
plan of switch and connection, from which the principle of the apparatus
will be gathered. The two links, LL, are thin springy brass strips slightly
curved, and at the rear end pivoted on the binding posts T1 T2. Underneath
the other ends solder the heads of a couple of brass nails. The links are
held parallel to one another by a wooden yoke, from the centre of which
projects a handle. The three contacts C1 C2 C3 must be the same distance
apart as the centres of the link heads, and so situated as to lie on the
arcs of circles described by the links. The binding post T3 is connected
with the two outside contacts--which may be flat-headed brass nails driven
in almost flush with the top of the wooden base--by wires lying in grooves
under the base, and T4 with the central contact. As shown, the switch is in
the neutral position and the circuit broken.

[Illustration: Fig. 49.--Multiple battery switch.]

Multiple Battery Switch.--To control the speed of the train and economize
current a multiple battery switch is useful. Fig. 49 explains how to make
and connect up such a switch. The contacts, C1 to C5, lie in the path of
the switch lever, and are connected through binding posts T1 to T6 with one
terminal of their respective cells. The cells are coupled up in series to
one another, and one terminal of the series with binding posts T0 and T6.
By moving the lever, any number of the cells can be put in circuit with T7.
The button under the head of the lever should not be wide enough to bridge
the space between any two contacts. Change the order of the cells
occasionally to equalize the exhaustion.

[Illustration: FIG. 50.--Adjustable resistance for controlling current.]

Resistance.--With accumulators, a "resistance" should be included in the
circuit to regulate the flow of current. The resistance shown in Fig. 50
consists of a spiral of fine German silver wire lying in the grooved
circumference of a wood disc. One of the binding posts is in connection
with the regulating lever pivot, the other with one end of the coil. By
moving the lever along the coil the amount of German silver wire, which
offers resistance to the current, is altered. When starting the motor use
as little current as possible, and open the resistance as it gets up speed,
choking down again when the necessary speed is attained.

General.--All the three fittings described should for convenience be
mounted on the same board, which itself may form the cover of the box
holding the dry cells or accumulators.


SOME SUGGESTIONS.

Instead of dry cells or accumulators a small foot or hand operated dynamo
generating direct, not alternating current, might be used. Its life is
indefinitely long, whereas dry cells become exhausted with use, and
accumulators need recharging from time to time. On occasion such a dynamo
might prove very convenient.

Anyone who possesses a fair-sized stationary engine and boiler might
increase the realism of the outdoor track by setting up a generating
station, which will give a good deal of extra fun.



XIV. A SIMPLE RECIPROCATING ENGINE.

Figs. 51 and 52 illustrate a very simple form of fixed-cylinder engine
controlled by a slide valve.

An open-ended "trunk" piston, similar in principle to that used in gas
engines, is employed; and the valve is of the piston type, which is less
complicated than the box form of valve, though less easily made steam-tight
in small sizes. The engine is single-acting, making only one power stroke
per revolution.

The cylinder is a piece of brass tubing; the piston another piece of
tubing, fitting the first telescopically. Provided that the fit is true
enough to prevent the escape of steam, while not so close as to set up
excessive friction, a packing behind the piston is not needed; but should
serious leakage be anticipated, a packing of thick felt or cloth, held up
by a washer and nuts on the gudgeon G, will make things secure. Similarly
for the built-up piston valve P may be substituted a piece of close-fitting
brass rod with diameter reduced, except at the ends, by filing or turning,
to allow the passage of steam.


CONSTRUCTION.

[Illustration: FIG. 51.--Elevation of simple reciprocating steam engine.]

The bed is made of wood, preferably oak, into the parts of which linseed
oil is well rubbed before they are screwed together, to prevent the entry
of water. A longitudinal groove is sawn in the top of the bed, as indicated
by the dotted line in Fig. 51, to give room for the connecting rod in its
lowest position, and a cross groove is scooped in line with the crank shaft
to accommodate the lower part of the crank disc and the big end of the rod.
(If the wing W under the cylinder is screwed to the side of the bed,
instead of passing through it, as shown, a slight cutting away of the edge
will give the necessary clearance in both cases. )

[Illustration: FIG. 52.--Plan of simple reciprocating steam engine.]

The cylinder and valve tube A should be flattened by filing and rubbing on
emery cloth, so that they may bed snugly against one another and give a
good holding surface for the solder. A steam port, S P, should next be
bored in each, and the "burr" of the edges cleaned off carefully so as not
to obstruct valve or piston in the slightest degree. "Tin" the contact
surfaces thinly, and after laying valve tube and cylinder in line, with the
portholes corresponding exactly, bind them tightly together with a turn or
two of wire, or hold them lightly in a vice, while the solder is made to
run again with the aid of a spirit lamp. If it seems necessary, run a
little extra solder along the joint, both sides, and at the ends.

The valve, if built up, consists of a central rod, threaded at the rear
end, four washers which fit the tube, and a central spacing-piece. The
forward washer is soldered to the rod. Behind this is placed a felt
packing. Then come in order the central spacing-piece, with a washer
soldered to each end, a second packing, and a fourth washer. The series is
completed by an adjusting nut to squeeze the packings, and a lock nut to
prevent slipping. The back end of the valve must be wide enough to just
more than cover the steam port. If the felt proves difficult to procure or
fit, one may use a ring or two of brass tubing, with an external packing of
asbestos cord.

The cylinder wing W should have the top edge turned over for an eighth of
an inch or so to give a good bearing against the cylinder, and be held in
position by a wire while the soldering is done. It is important that the
line of the wing should be at right angles to a line passing through the
centres of the valve tube and cylinder.

Shaft Bearings.--Take a piece of strip brass half an inch or so wide and
3-1/2 inches long. Bore four holes for screws, and scratch cross lines an
inch from each extremity. Turn up the ends at these lines at right angles
to the central part, stand the piece on some flat surface, and on the outer
faces of the uprights scratch two cross lines at the height of the centre
of the cylinder above the bed. Mark the central points of these lines.

Next select a piece of brass tubing which fits the rod chosen for the crank
shaft, and bore in the bearing standards two holes to fit this tubing. Slip
the tubing through the standards and solder it to them. The ends and
central parts of the tubing must now be so cut away as to leave two
bearings, BB--that at the fly-wheel end projecting far enough to allow
the fly wheel, when brought up against it, to just clear the bed; that at
the crank end being of the proper length to allow the eccentric to be in
line with the valve rod, and the crank disc to occupy its proper position
relatively to the central line of the cylinder. Finish off the standards by
filing the tops concentrically with the bearings.

The eccentric may be built up from a metal disc about 3/4 inch diameter and
two slightly larger discs soldered concentrically to the sides. The width
of the middle disc should be the same as that of the eccentric rod. A
careful filer could make a passable eccentric by sinking a square or
semicircular groove in the edge of a wide disc. The centre of the eccentric
must be found carefully, and a point marked at a distance from it equal to
half the travel of the valve. To ascertain this, pull the valve forward
until the steam port is fully exposed, insert a bar at the rear end of the
valve tube, and mark it. Then push the valve back until a wire pushed
through the port from the cylinder side shows that the port is again fully
exposed. Insert and mark the bar again. The distance between the marks
gives you the "travel" required.


Order of Assembly.--The following list of operations in their order may
assist the beginner:

Make the bed.

Cut out cylinder barrel, piston, and valve tube.

Bevel off the ends of the last inside to allow the valve to enter easily.

Make the valve.

Bore the steam ports, and solder valve tube and cylinder together.

Solder holding-down wing, W, to cylinder.

Finish off the piston.

Solder the bearings in their standards.

Prepare shaft, crank disc, crank pin, and piston rod.

Fix the cylinder to the bed, in which a slot must be cut for the wing and
holding-down bolt.

Attach the piston rod to the piston, and insert piston in cylinder.

Bore hole for shaft in centre of crank disc, and another, 9/16 inch away
(centre to centre), for crank pin.

Solder in crank pin squarely to disc.

Pass shaft through bearings and slip on the crank disc.

Pass front end of piston rod over the crank pin.

Lay bearing standard on bed squarely to the centre line of the cylinder,
turn crank fully back, and move the standard about till the back end of the
piston clears the back end of the cylinder by about 1/32 inch.

Get standard quite square, and adjust sideways till connecting rod is in
line with axis of cylinder.

Mark off and screw down the standard.

Make the eccentric, eccentric rod, and strap. Slip eccentric on shaft.

Put valve in position and draw it forward till the port is exposed.

Turn the eccentric forward, and mark the rod opposite centre of valve pin.

Bore hole for pin, and insert pin.

Hold the crank shaft firmly, and revolve eccentric till the port just
begins to open on its forward stroke. Rotate crank disc on shaft till the
crank pin is full forward.

Solder eccentric and disc to shaft.

Solder steam pipe to cylinder, and a brass disc to the rear end of the
cylinder.

Fit a fly wheel of metal or wood. This must be fairly heavy, as it has to
overcome all friction during the return or exhaust stroke.


Action of Engine.--During the forward motion of the piston the valve is
pushed back by the eccentric until the steam port is fully opened, and is
then drawn forward, covering the port. At the end of the power stroke the
port has begun to open to the air, to allow the steam to escape throughout
the exhaust stroke, in the course of which the valve is pushed back until,
just at the end of the stroke, the steam port begins to open again.

Notes.--
(l.) The connecting rod may be made shorter than shown in Figs.
51 and 52; but in that case the piston also must be shortened to allow for
the greater obliquity of the rod at half-stroke.

(2.) If two opposed cylinders are made to operate the one crank, a
double-acting engine is obtained. Both valves may be operated by a single
eccentric, the connecting rod of one being pivoted to a small lug
projecting from the eccentric strap. If three cylinders are set 120 degrees
apart round the crank shaft, a continuous turning effect is given. This
type will be found useful for running small dynamos.

(3.) If it is desired to use the exhaust steam to promote a draught in the
boiler furnace, it should be led away by a small pipe from the rear end of
the valve tube.



XV.  A HORIZONTAL SLIDE-VALVE ENGINE.

The reader who has succeeded in putting together the simple engine
described in the preceding chapter may wish to try his hand on something
more ambitious in the same line. The engine illustrated in Figs. 53 to 66
will give sufficient scope for energy and handiness with drill and
soldering iron. The writer made an engine of the same kind, differing only
from that shown in the design of the crosshead guides, without the
assistance of a lathe, except for turning the piston and fly wheel--the
last bought in the rough. Files, drills, taps, a hack saw, and a soldering
iron did all the rest of the work.

Solder plays so important a part in the assembling of the many pieces of
the engine that, if the machine fell into the fire, a rapid disintegration
would follow. But in actual use the engine has proved very satisfactory;
and if not such as the highly-skilled model-maker with a well-equipped
workshop at his command would prefer to expend his time on, it will afford
a useful lesson in the use of the simpler tools. Under 50 lbs. of steam it
develops sufficient power to run a small electric-lighting installation, or
to do other useful work on a moderate scale.

[Illustration: Fig. 53.--Elevation of a large horizontal engine.]


The principal dimensions of the engine are as follows:

Bedplate (sheet zinc), 13-1/2 inches long; 4-1/2 inches wide; 1/8 inch
thick.

Support of bedplate (1/20 inch zinc), 3 inches high from wooden base to
underside of bedplate.

Cylinder (mandrel-drawn brass tubing), 1-1/2 inches internal diameter;
2-13/16 inches long over all.

Piston, 1-1/2 inches diameter; 1/2 inch long.

Stroke of piston, 2-1/4 inches.

Connecting rod, 5 inches long between centres; 5/16 inch diameter.

Piston rod, 5-1/8 inches long; 1/4 inch diameter.

Valve rod, 4-1/8 inches long; 3/16 inch diameter.

Crank shaft, 5 inches long; 1/2 inch diameter.

Centre line of piston rod, 1-1/4 inches laterally from near edge of bed;
1-5/8 inches from valve-rod centre line; 1-5/8 inches vertically above bed.

Centre line of crank shaft, 10-3/8 inches from cross centre line of
cylinder.

Bearings, 1 inch long.

Eccentric, 9/32-inch throw.

Fly wheel, diameter, 7-1/2 inches; width, 1 inch; weight, 6 lbs.

Pump, 3/8-inch bore; 3/8-inch stroke; plunger, 2 inches long.

[Illustration: Fig. 54.--Plan of a large horizontal engine.]

Other dimensions will be gathered from the various diagrams of details.


The reader will, of course, suit his own fancy in following these
dimensions, or in working to them on a reduced scale, or in modifying
details where he considers he can effect his object in a simpler manner.

The diagrams are sufficiently explicit to render it unnecessary to describe
the making of the engine from start to finish, so remarks will be limited
to those points which require most careful construction and adjustment.

[Illustration: Fig. 55.--Standards of Bedplate.]

The Bedplate.--This should be accurately squared and mounted on its four
arch-like supports. (For dimensions, consult Fig. 55.) Half an inch is
allowed top and bottom for the turnovers by which the supports are screwed
to the bedplate and base. The ends of the longer supports are turned back
so as to lie in front of the end supports, to which they may be attached by
screws or solder, after all four parts have been screwed to the bed. Care
must be taken that the parts all have the same height. Drill all holes in
the turnovers before bending. Use 1/8-inch screws. Turn the bed bottom
upwards, and stand the four supports, temporarily assembled, on it upside
down and in their correct positions, and mark off for the 3/32-inch holes
to be drilled in the bed. A hole 3/4 inch in diameter should be cut in the
bedplate for the exhaust pipe, round a centre 2 inches from the end and
1-5/8 inches from the edge on the fly-wheel side, and two more holes for
the pump.

Making the Cylinder Slide and Valve.--The cylinder barrel must be
perfectly cylindrical and free from any dents. Mandrel-drawn brass tubing,
1/16-inch thick, may be selected. If you cannot get this turned off at the
ends in a lathe, mark the lines round it for working to with the aid of a
perfectly straight edged strip of paper, 2-13/16 inches wide, rolled twice
round the tube. The coils must lie exactly under one another. Make plain
scratches at each end of the paper with a sharp steel point. Cut off at a
distance of 1/16-inch from the lines, and work up to the lines with a file,
finishing by rubbing the ends on a piece of emery cloth resting on a hard,
true surface.

[Illustration: FIG. 56.-Cylinder standard before being bent.]

A square-cornered notch 1/8 inch deep and 7/8 inch wide must now be cut in
each end of the barrel, the two notches being exactly in line with one
another. These are to admit steam from the steam ways into the cylinder.

Cylinder Standards.-Use 5/64 or 3/32 inch brass plate for these. Two pieces
of the dimensions shown in Fig. 56 are needed. Scratch a line exactly down
the middle of each, and a cross line 1/2 inch from one end. The other end
should be marked, cut, and filed to a semicircle. Drill three 3/16-inch
holes in the turnover for the holding-down screws. The two standards should
now be soldered temporarily together at the round ends and trued up to
match each other exactly. Place them in the vice with the bending lines
exactly level with the jaws, split the turnovers apart, and hammer them
over at right angles to the main parts. Whether this has been done
correctly may be tested by placing the standards on a flat surface. Take
the standards apart, and scratch a cross line on each 1-5/8 inch from the
lower surface of the foot on the side away from the foot. Make a punch mark
where the line crosses the vertical line previously drawn, and with this as
centre describe a circle of the diameter of the outside of the barrel. Cut
out the inside and file carefully up to the circle, stopping when the
barrel makes a tight fit. On the inside of the hole file a nick 1/8 inch
deep, as shown in Fig. 56. Remember that this nick must be on the left of
one standard and on the right of the other, so that they shall pair off
properly.

Standards and barrel must now be cleaned for soldering. Screw one standard
down to a wood base; slip one end of the barrel into it; pass the other
standard over the other end of the barrel, and adjust everything so that
the barrel ends are flush with the, outer surfaces of the standard, and the
nicks of the barrel in line with the standard nicks. Then screw the other
standard to the base. Solder must be run well into the joints, as these
will have to stand all the longitudinal working strain.

The next step is the fitting of the cylinder covers. If you can obtain two
stout brass discs 2-1/8 inches in diameter, some trouble will be saved;
otherwise you must cut them out of 3/32-inch plate. The centre of each
should be marked, and four lines 45 degrees apart be scratched through it
from side to side. A circle of 15/16-inch radius is now drawn to cut the
lines, and punch marks are made at the eight points of intersection. Solder
the covers lightly to the foot side of their standards, marked sides
outwards, and drill 1/8-inch holes through cover and standard at the punch
marks. Make matching marks on the edges. Unsolder the covers, enlarge the
holes in them to take 5/32-inch screws; and tap the holes in the standards.
This method will ensure the holes being in line, besides avoiding the
trouble of marking off the standards separately.

Bore a 1/4-inch hole in the centre of one cover--be sure that it is the
right one--for the piston rod.

You can now proceed to the making of the piston-rod gland (Fig. 54, G1).
Fig. 57 shows how this is built up of pieces of tubing and brass lugs for
the screws. If possible, get the tubular parts trued in a lathe.

[Illustration: FIG. 57.--Vertical section of cylinder.]

Before the gland is soldered to the cover, the cover should be put in
place, the piston rod attached to the piston, and the parts of the gland
assembled. Push the piston rod through the cover until the piston is hard
up against the back of the cover. Slip the gland over the rod, turn it so
that the screws are parallel to the foot of the standard, and make the
solder joint. This is the best way of getting the gland exactly concentric
with the cylinder so that the piston rod shall move without undue friction.
But you must be careful not to unsolder the cylinder from its standard or
the parts of the gland. Blacken the piston rod in a candle flame to prevent
solder adhering.

Steam Chest.--The walls of the steam chest are best made in one piece out
of 1/2-inch brass by cutting out to the dimension given in Fig. 58. A sharp
fret saw will remove the inside rectangle. Get both inside and outside
surfaces as square as possible in all directions, and rub down the two
contact faces on emery cloth supported by an old looking-glass.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.-Wall-piece for steam chest, with gland and valve
rod in position.]

Two perfectly flat plates of 1/8-inch brass are cut to the size given in
Fig. 59, or a little longer both ways, to allow for working down to the
same area as the wall-piece. This operation should be carried out after
soldering the three pieces together. File and rub the sides until no
projections are visible. Then drill twelve 3/32-inch holes right through
the three parts. After separating them, the holes in the walls and what
will be the cover must be enlarged to an easy fit for 1/8-inch bolts, and
the valve plate tapped.

Now drill 3/16-inch holes centrally through the ends of the walls for the
valve rod. If the first hole is drilled accurately, the second hole should
be made without removing the drill, as this will ensure the two holes being
in line. If, however, luck is against you, enlarge the holes and get the
rod into its correct position by screwing and soldering small drilled
plates to the outside of the chest. Also drill and tap a hole for the
lubricator. The attachment of the gland (Fig. 54, G2) is similar to that of
the cylinder gland, and therefore need not be detailed.

The Valve Plate (Fig. 59).--Three ports must be cut in this--a central
one, 7/8 by 3/32 inch, for the exhaust; and two inlets, 7/8 by 3/32 inch,
1/8 inch away from the exhaust. These are easily opened out if a series of
holes be drilled along their axes.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Valve plate.]

The Steam Ways.--The formation of the steam ways between valve plate and
cylinder is the most ticklish bit of work to be done on the engine as it
entails the making of a number of solder joints close together.

[Illustration: FIG. 60.--Piece for steam ways.]

We begin by cutting out of 1/20-inch sheet brass a piece shaped as in Fig.
60. Parallel to the long edges, and 3/8 inch away, scribe bending lines.
Join these by lines 5/8 inch from the short edges, and join these again by
lines 1/4 inch from the bending lines. Cuts must now be made along the
lines shown double in Fig. 60. Bend parts CC down and parts BB upwards, so
that they are at right angles to parts AA. The positions of these parts,
when the piece is applied to the cylinder, are shown in Fig. 62.

[Illustration: FIG. 61.--Valve plate and steam ways in section.]

One must now make the bridge pieces (Fig. 61, a, a) to separate the inlet
passages from the exhaust. Their width is the distance between the
bent-down pieces CC of Fig. 60, and their bottom edges are shaped to the
curvature of the cylinder barrel. Finally, make the pieces bb (Fig. 61),
which form part of the top of the steam ways.

In the assembling of these parts a blowpipe spirit lamp or a little "Tinol"
soldering lamp will prove very helpful.

The following order should be observed:

(1.) Solder the piece shown in Fig. 60 to the cylinder barrel by the long
edges, and to the cylinder supports at the ends. This piece must, of
course, cover the steam ports in the cylinder.

(2.) Put pieces aa (Fig. 61) in position, with their tops quite flush with
the tops of BB (Fig. 62), and solder them to the cylinder barrel and sides
of the steam-way piece.

(3.) Solder the valve plate centrally to BB, and to the tops of aa, which
must lie between the central and outside ports. Take great care to make
steam-tight joints here, and to have the plate parallel to the standards in
one direction and to the cylinder in the other.

(4.) Solder in pieces bb. These should be a tight fit, as it is difficult
to hold them in place while soldering is done.

(5.) Bore a 5/16-inch hole in the lower side of the central division and
solder on the exhaust pipe.

Slide Valve.--The contact part of this is cut out of flat sheet brass
(Fig. 63), and to one side is soldered a cap made by turning down the edges
of a cross with very short arms. The little lugs aa are soldered to this,
and slotted with a jeweller's file to engage with notches cut in the valve
rod (see Figs. 58 and 62).

[Illustration: FIG. 63.-Parts of slide valve.]

The Crank and Crank Shaft.--The next thing to take in hand is the fixing
of the crank shaft. This is a piece of 3/8 or 1/2 inch steel rod 5 inches
long.

The bearings for this may be pieces of brass tubing, fitting the rod fairly
tight. By making them of good length--1 inch--the wear is reduced to almost
nothing if the lubricating can is used as often as it should be.

Each bearing is shown with two standards. The doubling increases rigidity,
and enables an oil cup to be fixed centrally.

The shape of the standards will be gathered from Fig. 53, their outline
being dotted in behind the crank.

Cut out and bend the standards--after drilling the holes for the foot
screws--before measuring off for the centres of the holes; in fact, follow
the course laid down with regard to the cylinder standards.

Make a bold scratch across the bedplate to show where the centre line of
the shaft should be, and another along the bed for the piston-rod centre
line. (Position given on p. 138.)

Bore holes in the bearings for the oil cups, which may be merely forced in
after the engine is complete.

The crank boss may be made out of a brass disc 2-3/4 inches diameter and
3/16 inch thick, from which two curved pieces are cut to reduce the crank
to the shape shown in Fig. 53. The heavier portion, on the side of the
shaft away from the crank pin, helps to counterbalance the weight of the
connecting and piston rods. In Fig. 54 (plan of engine) you will see that
extra weight in this part has been obtained by fixing a piece of suitably
curved metal to the back of the boss.

The mounting of the crank boss on the shaft and the insertion of the crank
pin into the boss might well be entrusted to an expert mechanic, as
absolute "squareness" is essential for satisfactory working. Screw-thread
attachments should be used, and the crankshaft should project
sufficiently to allow room for a flat lock nut. The crank pin will be
rendered immovable by a small lock screw penetrating the boss edgeways and
engaging with a nick in the pin.

Fixing the Standards and Bearings.--Place the two bearings in their
standards and slip the crank shaft through them. Place standards on the
bed, with their centre lines on the crank-shaft centre line. The face of
the crank should be about 3/8 inch away from the piston rod centre line.
Bring the nearer bearing up against the back of the disc, and arrange the
standards equidistantly from the ends of the bearing. The other bearing
should overlap the edge of the bed by about 1/8 inch. Get all standards
square to the edge of the bed, and mark off the positions of screw holes in
bed. Remove the standards, drill and tap the bed-plate holes, and replace
parts as before, taking care that the lubricating holes in the bearings
point vertically upwards. Then solder bearings to standards.

If any difficulty is experienced in getting all four standards to bed
properly, make the bearing holes in the two inner ones a rather easy fit.
The presence of the crank-shaft will assure the bearings being in line when
the soldering is completed.

The standards and bed should have matching marks made on them.

The Eccentric.--This can be formed by soldering two thin brass discs
1-15/16-inch diameter concentrically to the sides of a disc of
1-15/16-inch diameter and 5/16 inch thick. The centre of the shaft hole
must be exactly 9/32 inch from the centre of the eccentric to give the
proper valve-travel. Drill and tap the eccentric edgeways for a lock screw.

A piece to which the eccentric strap, eccentric rod, and pump rod are
attached is cut out of 5/16-inch brass. Its shape is indicated in Fig. 53.
The side next the eccentric must be shaped as accurately as possible to the
radius of the eccentric. The strap, of strip brass, is fastened to the
piece by four screws, the eccentric rod by two screws.

Crosshead and Guides.--The crosshead (Figs. 53 and 54) is built up by
soldering together a flat foot of steel, a brass upright, and a tubular top
fitting the piston rod. The guides, which consist of a bed, covers, and
distance-pieces united by screws (Fig. 64), have to withstand a lot of
wear, and should preferably be of steel. The importance of having them
quite flat and straight is, of course, obvious.

[Illustration: FIG. 64.--Cross section of crosshead and guide.]

The last 1-3/8 inches of the piston rod has a screw thread cut on it to
engage with a threaded hole in the fork (cut out of thick brass plate), to
which the rear end of the connecting rod is pinned, and to take the lock
nut which presses the crosshead against this fork.

Assuming that all the parts mentioned have been prepared, the cylinder
should be arranged in its proper place on the bed, the piston rod centrally
over its centre line. Mark and drill the screw holes in the bed.

The Valve Gear.--We may now attend to the valve gear. A fork must be made
for the end of the valve rod, and soldered to it with its slot at right
angles to the slots which engage with the valve lugs. Slip the rod into the
steam chest, put the valve on the rod, and attach the chest (without the
cover) to the valve plate by a bolt at each corner. Pull the valve forward
till the rear port is just uncovered, and turn the eccentric full forward.
You will now be able to measure off exactly the distance between the
centres of the valve-rod fork pin and the rear screw of the eccentric. The
valve connecting rod (Fig. 53, VCR) should now be made and placed in
position. If the two forward holes are filed somewhat slot-shaped, any
necessary adjustment of the valve is made easier. If the adjustment of VCR
and the throw of the eccentric are correct, the valve will just expose both
end ports alternately when the crank is revolved. If one port is more
exposed than the other, adjust by means of the eccentric screws till a
balance is obtained. Should the ports still not be fully uncovered, the
throw of the eccentric is too small, and you must either make a new
eccentric or reduce the width of the valve. (The second course has the
disadvantage of reducing the expansive working of the steam.) Excess
movement, on the other hand, implies too great an eccentric throw.

Setting the Eccentric.--Turn the crank full forward, so that a line
through the crank pin and shaft centres is parallel to the bed. Holding it
in this position, revolve the eccentric (the screw of which should be
slackened off sufficiently to allow the eccentric to move stiffly) round
the shaft in a clockwise direction, until it is in that position below the
shaft at which the front steam port just begins to show. Then tighten up
the eccentric lock screw.[1]

[Footnote 1: The reader is referred to an excellent little treatise,
entitled "The Slide Valve" (Messrs. Percival Marshall and Co., 26 Poppin's
Court, Fleet Street, E.C. Price 6d.), for a full explanation of the
scientific principles of the slide valve.]

The Connecting Rod.--The length of this from centre to centre of the pins
on which it works should be established as follows:--Slip over the piston
rod a disc of card 1/32 inch thick. Then pass the rod through the gland and
assemble the crosshead and fork on its end, and assemble the guides round
the crosshead foot. Turn the crank pin full forward, pull the piston rod
out as far as it will come, measure the distance between pin centres very
carefully, and transfer it to a piece of paper.

The rod consists of a straight central bar and two rectangular halved ends.
The ends should be cut out of brass and carefully squared. Through their
exact centres drill 1/8-inch holes, and cut the pieces squarely in two
across these holes. The sawed faces should be filed down to a good fit and
soldered together. Now drill holes of the size of the pins, using what
remains of the holes first made to guide the drill. The bolt holes are
drilled next, and finally the holes for lubrication and those to take the
rods. Then lay the two ends down on the piece of paper, so that their
pinholes are centred on the centre marks, and the holes for the rod are
turned towards one another. Cut off a piece of steel rod of the proper
length and unsolder the ends. The rod pieces must then be assembled on the
rod, and with it be centred on the paper and held in position while the
parts are soldered together.


OTHER DETAILS.

Adjusting the Guides.--Put the connecting rod in place on its pins, and
revolve the crank until the guides have taken up that position which allows
the crosshead to move freely. Then mark off the holes for the guide
holding-down screws, and drill and tap them.

Packings.--The glands and piston should be packed with asbestos string.
Don't be afraid of packing too tightly, as the tendency is for packing to
get slacker in use. The rear end of the cylinder should be bevelled off
slightly inside, to allow the packed piston to enter easily.

Joints.--The cylinder head and valve chest joints should be made with
stout brown paper soaked in oil or smeared with red lead. All screw holes
should be cut cleanly through the paper, and give plenty of room for the
screws.

[Illustration:  FIG. 66.-Vertical section of force pump driven by engine.]

When making a joint, tighten up the screws in rotation, a little at a time
so as not to put undue strain on any screw. Wait an hour or two, and go
round with the screw-driver again.

Lubrication.--When the engine is first put under steam, lubrication
should be very liberal, to assure the parts "settling down" without undue
wear.

The Pump.--Fig. 65 shows in section the pump, which will be found a
useful addition to the engine. (For other details, see Figs. 53 and 54.)
Its stroke is only that of the eccentric, and as the water passages and
valves are of good size, it will work efficiently at high speed. The method
of making it will be obvious from the diagrams, and space will therefore
not be devoted to a detailed description. The valve balls should, of
course, be of gun-metal or brass, and the seatings must be prepared for
them by hammering in a steel ball of the same size.

In practice it is advisable to keep the pump always working, and to
regulate the delivery to the boiler by means of a by-pass tap on the feed
pipe, through which all or some of the water may be returned direct to the
tank.

The tank, which should be of zinc, may conveniently be placed under the
engine. If the exhaust steam pipe be made to traverse the tank along or
near the bottom, a good deal of what would otherwise be wasted heat will be
saved by warming the feed water.


Making a Governor.

[Illustration:  FIG. 66.--Elevation of governor for horizontal engine.
Above is plan of valve and rod gear.]

It is a great advantage to have the engine automatically governed, so that
it may run at a fairly constant speed under varying loads and boiler
pressures. In the absence of a governor one has to be constantly working
the throttle; with one fitted, the throttle can be opened up full at the
start, and the automatic control relied upon to prevent the engine knocking
itself to pieces.

The vertical centrifugal apparatus shown in Fig. 66 was made by the writer,
and acted very well. The only objection to it is its displacement of the
pump from the bed. But a little ingenuity will enable the pump to be driven
off the fly wheel end of the crank shaft, or, if the shaft is cut off
pretty flush with the pulley, off a pin in the face of the pulley.

Turning to Fig. 66, A is a steel spindle fixed in a base, L, screwed to the
bed. B is a brass tube fitting A closely, and resting at the bottom on a
1/4-inch piece of similar tubing pinned to A.

A wooden pulley jammed on B transmits the drive from a belt which passes at
its other end round a similar, but slightly larger, pulley on the crank
shaft. This pulley is accommodated by moving the eccentric slightly nearer
the crank and shortening the fly-wheel side bearing a little.

The piece G, fixed to B by a lock screw, has two slots cut in it to take
the upper ends of the weight links DD; and C, which slides up and down B,
is similarly slotted for the links EE. Each of the last is made of two
similarly shaped plates of thin brass, soldered together for half their
length, but separated 3/32 inch at the top to embrace the projections of D.
To prevent C revolving relatively to B, a notch is filed in one side of the
central hole, to engage with a piece of brass wire soldered on B (shown
solid black in the diagram). A spiral steel spring, indicated in section by
a number of black dots, presses at the top against the adjustable collar F,
and at the bottom against C.

The two weights WW are pieces of brass bar slotted for driving on to DD,
which taper gently towards the outer edge.

When the pulley revolves, centrifugal force makes WW fly outwards against
the pressure of the spring, and the links EE raise C, which in turn lifts
the end of lever M. A single link, N, transmits the motion from a pin on M
to the double bell-crank lever O (see Fig. 66) pivoted on a standard, P,
attached to the bedplate. The slotted upper ends of P engage with pins on
an adjustable block, R, which moves the governing valve V (solid black),
working in the tube S through a gland. The higher M is raised the farther
back is V moved, and its annular port is gradually pushed more out of line
with two ports in the side of the valve tube, thus reducing the flow of
steam from the supply pipe to the cylinder connection on the other side of
the tube. This connection, by-the-bye, acts as fulcrum for lever M, which
is made in two parts, held together by screws, to render detachment easy.

The closer the fit that V makes with S the more effective will the
governing be. The gland at the end of S was taken from an old cylinder
cover.

Regulation of the speed may be effected either

(1) by driving the governor faster or slower relatively to the speed of the
crank shaft;

(2) by altering the position of W on D;

(3) by altering the compression of the spring by shifting F;

(4) by a combination of two or more of the above.

Generally speaking, (3) is to be preferred, as the simplest.

The belt may be made out of a bootlace or fairly stout circular elastic. In
either case the ends should be chamfered off to form a smooth joint, which
may be wrapped externally with thread.


FINAL HINTS.

All parts which have to be fitted together should have matching marks made
on them with the punch. To take the parts of the valve chest as an example.
As we have seen, these should be soldered together, finished off outside,
and drilled. Before separating them make, say, two punch marks on what will
be the upper edge of the valve plate near the end, and two similar marks on
the chest as near the first as they can conveniently be. In like manner
mark the chest cover and an adjacent part of the chest with three marks. It
is utterly impossible to reassemble the parts incorrectly after separation
if the marks are matched. Marking is of greatest importance where one piece
is held up to another by a number of screws. If it is omitted in such a
case, you may have a lot of trouble in matching the holes afterwards.

Jacket the cylinder with wood or asbestos, covered in neatly with sheet
brass, to minimize condensation. If the steam ways, valve chest, and steam
pipe also are jacketed, an increase in efficiency will be gained, though
perhaps somewhat at the expense of appearance.

Boiler.--The boiler described on pp. 211-216, or a vertical multitubular
boiler with about 800 sq. inches of heating surface will drive this engine
satisfactorily.



XVI. MODEL STEAM TURBINES.

Steam turbines have come very much to the fore during recent years,
especially for marine propulsion. In principle they are far simpler than
cylinder engines, steam being merely directed at a suitable angle on to
specially shaped vanes attached to a revolving drum and shaft. In the
Parsons type of turbine the steam expands as it passes through successive
rings of blades, the diameter of which rings, as well as the length and
number of the blades, increases towards the exhaust end of the casing, so
that the increasing velocity of the expanding steam may be taken full
advantage of. The De Laval turbine includes but a single ring of vanes,
against which the steam issues through nozzles so shaped as to allow the
steam to expand somewhat and its molecules to be moving at enormous
velocity before reaching the vanes. A De Laval wheel revolves at terrific
speeds, the limit being tens of thousands of turns per minute for the
smallest engines. The greatest efficiency is obtained, theoretically, when
the vane velocity is half that of the steam, the latter, after passing
round the curved inside surfaces of the vanes, being robbed of all its
energy and speed. (For a fuller description of the steam turbine, see How
It Works, Chap. III., pp.74-86.)

The turbines to be described work on the De Laval principle, which has been
selected as the easier for the beginner to follow.

A Very Simple Turbine.

We will begin with a very simple contrivance, shown in Fig. 67. As a "power
plant" it is confessedly useless, but the making of it affords amusement
and instruction. For the boiler select a circular tin with a jointless
stamped lid, not less than 4 inches in diameter, so as to give plenty of
heating surface, and at least 2-1/2 inches deep, to ensure a good steam
space and moderately dry steam. A shallow boiler may "prime" badly, if
reasonably full, and fling out a lot of water with the steam.

Clean the metal round the joints, and punch a small hole in the lid, half
an inch from the edge, to give egress to the heated air during the
operation of soldering up the point or joints, which must be rendered
absolutely water-tight.

[Illustration: FIG. 67.--Simple steam turbine.]

For the turbine wheel take a piece of thin sheet iron or brass; flatten it
out, and make a slight dent in it an inch from the two nearest edges. With
this dent as centre are scribed two circles, of 3/4 and 1/2 inch radius
respectively. Then scratch a series of radial marks between the circles, a
fifth of an inch apart. Cut out along the outer circle, and with your
shears follow the radial lines to the inner circle. The edge is thus
separated into vanes (Fig. 68), the ends of which must then be twisted
round through half a right angle, with the aid of a pair of narrow-nosed
pliers, care being taken to turn them all in the same direction.

[Illustration: FIG. 68.--Wheel for steam turbine, showing one vane
twisted into final position.]

A spindle is made out of a large pin, beheaded, the rough end of which must
be ground or filed to a sharp point. Next, just break through the metal of
the disc at the centre with a sharpened wire nail, and push the spindle
through till it projects a quarter of an inch or so. Soldering the disc to
the spindle is most easily effected with a blowpipe or small blow-lamp.

The Boiler.--In the centre of the boiler make a dent, to act as bottom
bearing for the spindle. From this centre describe a circle of 5/8-inch
radius. On this circle must be made the steam port or ports. Two ports, at
opposite ends of a diameter, give better results than a single port, as
equalizing the pressure on the vanes, so that the spindle is relieved of
bending strains. Their combined area must not, however, exceed that of the
single port, if one only be used. It is important to keep in mind that for
a turbine of this kind velocity of steam is everything, and that nothing is
gained by increasing the number or size of ports if it causes a fall in the
boiler pressure.

The holes are best made with a tiny Morse twist drill. As the metal is
thin, drill squarely, so that the steam shall emerge vertically.

For the upper bearing bend a piece of tin into the shape shown in Fig. 67.
The vertical parts should be as nearly as possible of the same length as
the spindle. In the centre of the underside of the standard make a deep
dent, supporting the metal on hard wood or lead, so that it shall not be
pierced. If this accident occurs the piece is useless.

Place the wheel in position, the longer part of the spindle upwards, and
move the standard about until the spindle is vertical in all directions.
Scratch round the feet of the standard to mark their exact position, and
solder the standard to the boiler. The top of the standard must now be bent
slightly upwards or downwards until the spindle is held securely without
being pinched.

A 3/16-inch brass nut and screw, the first soldered to the boiler round a
hole of the same size as its internal diameter, make a convenient "filler;"
but a plain hole plugged with a tapered piece of wood, such as the end of a
penholder, will serve.

Half fill the boiler by immersion in hot water, the large hole being kept
lowermost, and one of the steam vents above water to allow the air to
escape.

A spirit lamp supplies the necessary heat. Or the boiler may be held in a
wire cradle over the fire, near enough to make the wheel hum. Be careful
not to over-drive the boiler. As a wooden plug will probably be driven out
before the pressure can become dangerous, this is a point in favour of
using one. Corrosion of the boiler will be lessened if the boiler is kept
quite full of water when not in use.


A Practical Steam Turbine.

The next step takes us to the construction of a small turbine capable of
doing some useful work. It is shown in cross section and elevation in Fig.
69.

[Illustration: FIG. 69.--Model steam turbine, showing vertical cross
section (left) and external steam pipe (right).]

The rotor in this instance is enclosed in a case made up of two stout brass
discs, D and E, and a 3/4-inch length of brass tubing. The plates should be
1/2-inch larger in diameter than the ring, if the bolts are to go outside.
The stouter the parts, within reason, the better. Thick discs are not so
liable to cockle as thin ones, and a stout ring will make it possible to
get steam-tight joints with brown-paper packing.

The wheel is a disc of brass, say, 1/25 inch thick and 4 inches in
diameter; the spindle is 3/16 inch, of silver steel rod; the bearings,
brass tubing, making a close fit on the rod.

If you cannot get the ring ends turned up true in a lathe--a matter of but
a few minutes' work--rub them down on a piece of emery cloth supported on a
true surface, such as a piece of thick glass.

Now mark out accurately the centres of the discs on both sides, and make
marks to show which face of each disc is to be outside.

On the outside of both scribe circles of the size of the bearing tubes, and
other circles at the proper radius for the bolt hole centres.

On the outside of D scribe two circles of 2-inch and 1-11/16-inch radius,
between which the steam pipe will lie.

On the inside of D scribe a circle of 1-27/32-inch radius for the steam
ports.

On the outside of E mark a 7/8-inch circle for the exhaust pipe.

On the inside of both mark the circles between which the ring must lie.

Bolt Holes.--The marks for these, six or twelve in number, are equally
spaced on the outside of one plate, and the two plates are clamped or
soldered together before the boring is done, to ensure the holes being in
line. If the bolts are to screw into one plate, be careful to make the
holes of the tapping size in the first instance, and to enlarge those in D
afterwards. Make guide marks in the plates before separating, between what
will be the uppermost holes and the circumference.

Bolts.--These should be of brass if passed inside the ring. Nuts are not
necessary if  E is tapped, but their addition will give a smarter
appearance and prevent-the bolts becoming loose.

Bearings.--Bore central holes in the discs to a good fit for the
bearings, and prepare the hole for the exhaust pipe. This hole is most
easily made by drilling a ring of small holes just inside the mark and
cutting through the intervening metal.

For A, B, and C cut off pieces of bearing pipe, 1/2, 1/4, and 3/4 inch long
respectively, and bevel the ends of B and C as shown, to minimize friction
if they rub. File all other ends square. (Lathe useful here.)

Bore oil holes in B and C, and clear away all the "burr." Make scratches on
the bearings to show how far they should be pushed through the case.

Now assemble the case, taking care that the edge of the ring corresponds
exactly with the circles marked on the discs, and clean the metal round the
bearing holes and the bearings themselves. The last are then placed in
position, with the lubricating holes pointing upwards towards the guide
marks on the discs. Push the spindle rod through the bearings, which must
be adjusted until the rod can be revolved easily with the fingers. Then
solder in the bearing with a "Tinol" lamp.

The Wheel.--Anneal this well by heating to a dull red and plunging it in
cold water. Mark a circle of 1-1/4-inch radius, and draw radial lines 1/4
inch apart at the circumference from this circle to the edge. Cut out along
the lines, and twist the vanes to make an angle of about 60 degree with the
central part, and bend the ends slightly backward away from the direction
in which the rotor will revolve. (The directions given on p. 189 for making
a steam top wheel can be applied here.)

Bore a hole in the centre to make a tight fit with the spindle, and place
the rotor in position, with piece B in contact on the C side. Get
everything square (rotation will betray a bad wobble), and solder the three
parts together with the blow-lamp.

Mount the rotor squarely by the spindle points between two pieces of wood
held lightly in the vice, and, with the aid of a gauge fixed to the piece
nearest the wheel, true up the line of the vanes. (Lathe useful here.)

The Steam Pipe is 15 inches (or more) of 5/16-inch copper tubing, well
annealed. To assist the bending of it into a ring one needs some circular
object of the same diameter as the interior diameter of the ring round
which to curve it. I procured a tooth-powder box of the right size, and
nailed it firmly to a piece of board. Then I bevelled off the end of the
pipe to the approximately correct angle, laid it against the box, and drove
in a nail to keep it tight up. Bending was then an easy matter, a nail
driven in here and there holding the pipe until the ring was complete. I
then soldered the end to the standing part, and detached the ring for
flattening on one side with a file and emery cloth. This done, I bored a
hole through the tube at F to open up the blind end of the ring.

Attaching the ring to disc D is effected as follows:--Tin the contact
faces of the ring and disc pretty heavily with solder, after making poppet
marks round the guide circles so that they may not be lost under the
solder. The ring must be pressed tightly against its seat while heating is
done with the lamp. An extra pair of hands makes things easier at this
point. Be careful not to unsolder the spindle bearing, a thing which cannot
happen if the bearing is kept cool by an occasional drop or two of water. A
little extra solder should be applied round the points where the ports will
be.

The Steam Ports.--These are drilled (with a 1/32-inch twist drill), at an
angle of about 30 degrees to the plate, along the circle already scribed.
If you have any doubt as to your boiler's capacity, begin with one hole
only, and add a second if you think it advisable. As already remarked,
pressure must not be sacrificed to steam flow.

Lubricators.--These are short pieces of tubing hollowed at one end by a
round file of the same diameter as the bearings. A little "Tinol" is
smeared over the surfaces to be joined, and the lubricators are placed in
position and heated with the blow-lamp until the solder runs. To prevent
the oil flowing too freely, the lubricators should be provided with
airtight wooden plugs.

Escape Pipes.--The pipe for the exhaust steam is now soldered into disc
E, and a small water escape into the ring at its lowest point. This pipe
should be connected with a closed chamber or with the exhaust at a point
lower than the base of the turbine case.

Stirrup.--Fig. 69 shows a stirrup carrying a screw which presses against
the pulley end of the spindle. This attachment makes it easy to adjust the
distance between the rotor and the steam ports, and also concentrates all
end thrust on to a point, thereby minimizing friction. The stirrup can be
fashioned in a few minutes out of brass strip. Drill the holes for the
holding-on screws; drill and tap a hole for the adjusting screw; insert the
screw and centre it correctly on the spindle point. Then mark the
position of the two screw holes in E; drill and tap them.

Feet are made of sheet brass, drilled to take the three (or two) lowermost
bolts, and bent to shape. Note.--A side and foot may be cut out of one
piece of metal. The difficulty is that the bending may distort the side,
and prevent a tight joint between side and ring.

Assembling.--Cut out two rings of stout brown paper a quarter of an inch
wide and slightly larger in diameter than the casing ring. In assembling
the turbine finally, these, after being soaked in oil, should be inserted
between the ring and the discs. Put in four screws only at first, and get
the ring properly centred and the bearings exactly in line, which will be
shown by the spindle revolving easily. Then tighten up the nuts and insert
the other bolts, the three lowest of which are passed through the feet.
Affix the pulley and stirrup, and adjust the spindle longitudinally until
the rotor just does not rub the casing. The soldering on of the cap of A
completes operations.

To get efficiency, heavy gearing down is needed, and this can be managed
easily enough with the help of a clockwork train, decreasing the speed five
or more times for driving a dynamo, and much more still for slow work, such
as pumping.


A More Elaborate Turbine.

[Illustration: FIG. 70.--Vertical section of steam turbine with formed
blades (left); outside view of turbine, gear side (right).]

The turbine just described can hardly be termed an efficient one, as the
vanes, owing to their simple formation, are not shaped to give good
results. We therefore offer to our readers a design for a small turbine of
a superior character. This turbine is shown in elevation and section in
Fig. 70. The casing is, as in the preceding instance, made up of flat brass
plates and a ring of tubing, and the bearings, BG1, BG2, of brass tube. But
the wheel is built up of a disc 3 inches in diameter, round the
circumference of which are 32 equally-spaced buckets, blades, or vanes,
projecting 5/8 inch beyond the edge of the disc. The wheel as a whole is
mounted on a spindle 3-1/8 inches long, to which it is secured by three
nuts, N1 N2 N3. One end of the spindle is fined down to take a small
pinion, P1, meshing with a large pinion, P2, the latter running in
bearings, BG3, in the wheel-case and cover. The drive of the turbine is
transmitted either direct from the axle of P2 or from a pulley mounted on
it.


CONSTRUCTION.

[Illustration: FIG. 71.--Plate marked out for turbine wheel blades. B is
blade as it appears before being curved.]

The Wheel.--If you do not possess a lathe, the preparation of the spindle
and mounting the wheel disc on it should be entrusted to a mechanic. Its
diameter at the bearings should be 5/32 inch or thereabouts. (Get the
tubing for the bearings and for the spindle turned to fit.) The larger
portion is about twice as thick as the smaller, to allow room for the screw
threads. The right-hand end is turned down quite small for the pinion,
which should be of driving fit.

The Blades.--Mark out a piece of sheet iron as shown in Fig. 71 to form
32 rectangles, 1 by l/2 inch. The metal is divided along the lines aaaa,
bbbb, and ab, ab, ab, ab, etc. The piece for each blade then has a central
slot 5/16 inch long and as wide as the wheel disc cut very carefully in it.

Bending the Blades.--In the edge of a piece of hard wood 1 inch thick
file a notch 3/8 inch wide and 1/8 inch deep with a 1/2-inch circular
file, and procure a metal bar which fits the groove loosely. Each blade is
laid in turn over the groove, and the bar is applied lengthwise on it and
driven down with a mallet, to give the blade the curvature of the groove.
When all the blades have been made and shaped, draw 16 diameters through
the centre of the wheel disc, and at the 32 ends make nicks 1/16 inch deep
in the circumference.

True up the long edges of the blades with a file, and bring them off to a
sharp edge, removing the metal from the convex side.

Fixing the Blades.--Select a piece of wood as thick as half the width of
a finished blade, less half the thickness of the wheel disc. Cut out a
circle of this wood 2 inches in diameter, and bore a hole at the centre.
The wheel disc is then screwed to a perfectly flat board or plate, the
wooden disc being used as a spacer between them.

Slip a blade into place on the disc, easing the central slit, if necessary,
to allow the near edge to lie in contact with the board--that is parallel
to the disc. Solder on the blade, using the minimum of solder needed to
make a good joint. When all the blades are fixed, you will have a wheel
with the blades quite true on one side. It is, therefore, important to
consider, before commencing work, in which direction the concave side of
the blades should be, so that when the wheel is mounted it shall face the
nozzle.

To make this point clear: the direction of the nozzle having been decided,
the buckets on the trued side must in turn present their concave sides to
the nozzle. In Fig. 70 the nozzle points downwards, and the left side of
the wheel has to be trued. Therefore B1 has its convex, B2 its concave,
side facing the reader, as it were.

The Nozzle is a 1-1/2 inch piece of brass bar. Drill a 1/20-inch hole
through the centre. On the outside end, enlarge this hole to 1/8 inch to a
depth of 1/8 inch. The nozzle end is bevelled off to an angle of 20
degrees, and a broach is inserted to give the steam port a conical section,
as shown in Fig. 72, so that the steam may expand and gain velocity as it
approaches the blades. Care must be taken not to allow the broach to enter
far enough to enlarge the throat of the nozzle to more than 1/20 inch.

[Illustration: FIG. 72.--Nozzle of turbine, showing its position
relatively to buckets.]

Fixing the Nozzle.--The centre of the nozzle discharge opening is
1-13/16-inches from the centre of the wheel. The nozzle must make an angle
of 20 degrees with the side of the casing, through which it projects far
enough to all but touch the nearer edges of the vanes. (Fig. 72.) The wheel
can then be adjusted, by means of the spindle nuts, to the nozzle more
conveniently than the nozzle to the wheel. To get the hole in the casing
correctly situated and sloped, begin by boring a hole straight through, 1/4
inch away laterally from where the steam discharge hole will be, centre to
centre, and then work the walls of the hole to the proper angle with a
circular file of the same diameter as the nozzle piece, which is then
sweated in with solder. It is, of course, an easy matter to fix the nozzle
at the proper angle to a thin plate, which can be screwed on to the outside
of the casing, and this method has the advantage of giving easy detachment
for alteration or replacement.

Balancing the Wheel.--As the wheel will revolve at very high speed, it
should be balanced as accurately as possible. A simple method of testing is
to rest the ends of the spindle on two carefully levelled straight edges.
If the wheel persists in rolling till it takes up a certain position,
lighten the lower part of the wheel by scraping off solder, or by cutting
away bits of the vanes below the circumference of the disc, or by drilling
holes in the disc itself.

Securing the Wheel.--When the wheel has been finally adjusted relatively
to the nozzle, tighten up all the spindle nuts hard, and drill a hole for a
pin through them and the disc parallel to the spindle, and another through
N3 and the spindle. (Fig. 70.)

Gearing.--The gear wheels should be of good width, not less than 3/16
inch, and the smaller of steel, to withstand prolonged wear. Constant
lubrication is needed, and to this end the cover should make an oil-tight
fit with the casing, so that the bottom of the big pinion may run in oil.
To prevent overfilling, make a plug-hole at the limit level, and fit a
draw-off cock in the bottom of the cover. If oil ducts are bored in the
bearing inside the cover, the splashed oil will lubricate the big pinion
spindle automatically.

[Illustration: FIG. 73.--Perspective view of completed turbine.]

General--The sides of the casing are held against the drum by six screw
bolts on the outside of the drum. The bottom of the sides is flattened as
shown (Fig. 70), and the supports, S1 S2, made of such a length that when
they are screwed down the flattened part is pressed hard against the bed.
The oil box on top of the casing has a pad of cotton wool at the bottom to
regulate the flow of oil to the bearings. Fit a drain pipe to the bottom of
the wheel-case.

Testing.--If your boiler will make steam above its working pressure
faster than the turbine can use it, the nozzle may be enlarged with a
broach until it passes all the steam that can be raised; or a second nozzle
may be fitted on the other end of the diameter on which the first lies.
This second nozzle should have a separate valve, so that it can be shut
off.



XVIL. STEAM TOPS.

A very interesting and novel application of the steam turbine principle is
to substitute for a wheel running in fixed bearings a "free" wheel pivoted
on a vertical spindle, the point of which takes the weight, so that the
turbine becomes a top which can be kept spinning as long as the steam
supply lasts.

These toys, for such they must be considered, are very easy to make, and
are "warranted to give satisfaction" if the following instructions are
carried out.

A Small Top.--Fig. 74 shows a small specimen, which is of the
self-contained order, the boiler serving as support for the top.

[Illustration: FIG. 74.-Simplest form of steam top.] [1]

[Footnote 1: Spirit lamp shown for heating boiler.]

For the boiler use a piece of brass tubing 4 inches or so in diameter and 3
inches long. (The case of an old brass "drum" clock, which may be bought
for a few pence at a watchmaker's, serves very well if the small screw
holes are soldered over.) The ends should be of brass or zinc, the one
which will be uppermost being at least 1/16 inch thick. If you do not
possess a lathe, lay the tube on the sheet metal, and with a very sharp
steel point scratch round the angle between tube and plate on the inside.
Cut out with cold chisel or shears to within 1/16 inch of the mark, and
finish off carefully--testing by the tube now and then--to the mark.
Make a dent with a centre punch in the centre of the top plate for the top
to spin in.

[Illustration: FIG. 75.--Wheel of steam top, ready for blades to be bent.
A hole is drilled at the inner end of every slit to make bending easier.]

Solder the plates into the tube, allowing an overlap of a quarter of an
inch beyond the lower one, to help retain the heat.

The top wheel is cut out of a flat piece of sheet iron, zinc, or brass. Its
diameter should be about 2-1/2 inches, the vanes 1/2 inch long and 1/4 inch
wide at the circumference. Turn them over to make an angle of about 45
degrees with the spindle. They will be more easily bent and give better
results if holes are drilled, as shown in Fig. 75.

The spindle is made out of a bit of steel or wire--a knitting-needle or
wire-nail--not more than 1 inch in diameter and 1-1/2 inches long. The
hole for this must be drilled quite centrally in the wheel; otherwise the
top will be badly balanced, and vibrate at high speeds. For the same
reason, the spindle requires to be accurately pointed.

The steam ports are next drilled in the top of the boiler. Three of them
should be equally spaced (120 degrees apart) on a circle of 1-inch radius
drawn about the spindle poppet as centre. The holes must be as small as
possible--1/40 to 1/50 inch--and inclined at an angle of not more than
45 degrees to the top plate. The best drills for the purpose are tiny Morse
twists, sold at from 2d. to 3d. each, held in a pin vice rotated by the
fingers. The points for drilling should be marked with a punch, to give the
drills a hold. Commence drilling almost vertically, and as the drill enters
tilt it gradually over till the correct angle is attained.

If a little extra trouble is not objected to, a better job will be made of
this operation if three little bits of brass, filed to a triangular section
(Fig. 76 a), are soldered to the top plate at the proper places, so that
the drilling can be done squarely to one face and a perfectly clear hole
obtained. The one drawback to these additions is that the vanes of the
turbine may strike them. As an alternative, patches may be soldered to the
under side of the plate (Fig. 76, b) before it is joined to the barrel;
this will give longer holes and a truer direction to the steam ports.

[Illustration: FIG. 76. Steam port details.]

Note that it is important that the ports should be all of the same diameter
and tangential to the circle on which they are placed, and all equally
inclined to the plate. Differences in size or direction affect the running
of the top.

Solder the spindle to the wheel in such a position that the vanes clear the
boiler by an eighth of an inch or so. If tests show that the top runs quite
vertically, the distance might be reduced to half, as the smaller it is the
more effect will the steam jets have.

A small brass filler should be affixed to the boiler halfway up. A filler
with ground joints costs about 6d.

A wick spirit lamp will serve to raise steam. Solder to the boiler three
legs of such a length as to give an inch clearance between the lamp wick
and the boiler. If the wick is arranged to turn up and down, the speed of
the top can be regulated.

A Large Top.--The top just described must be light, as the steam driving
it is low-pressure, having free egress from the boiler, and small, as the
steam has comparatively low velocity. The possessor of a high-pressure
boiler may be inclined to make something rather more ambitious--larger,
heavier, and useful for displaying spectrum discs, etc.

The top shown in Fig. 77 is 3 inches in diameter, weighs 1 oz., and was cut
out of sheet-zinc. It stands on a brass disc, round the circumference of
which is soldered a ring of 5/32-inch copper tubing, furnished with a
union for connection with a boiler.

[Illustration: FIG. 77.---Large steam top and base.]

The copper tubing must be well annealed, so as to bend quite easily. Bevel
off one end, and solder this to the plate. Bend a couple of inches to the
curve of the plate, clamp it in position, and solder; and so on until the
circle is completed, bringing the tube snugly against the bevelled end. A
hole should now be drilled through the tube into this end--so that steam
may enter the ring in both directions-and plugged externally.

By preference, the ring should be below the plate, as this gives a greater
thickness of metal for drilling, and also makes it easy to jacket the tube
by sinking the plate into a wooden disc of somewhat greater diameter.

Under 50 lbs. of steam, a top of this kind attains a tremendous velocity.
Also, it flings the condensed steam about so indiscriminately that a ring
of zinc 3 inches high and 18 inches in diameter should be made wherewith to
surround it while it is running.

If a little bowl with edges turned over be accurately centred on the wheel,
a demonstration of the effects of centrifugal force may be made with water,
quicksilver, or shot, which fly up into the rim and disappear as the top
attains high speed, and come into sight again when its velocity decreases
to a certain figure. A perforated metal globe threaded on the spindle gives
the familiar humming sound.

A spectrum disc of the seven primary colours--violet, indigo, blue,
green, yellow, orange, red--revolved by the top, will appear more or less
white, the purity of which depends on the accuracy of the tints used.



XVIII.  MODEL BOILERS.

A chapter devoted to the construction of model boilers may well open with a
few cautionary words, as the dangers connected with steam-raisers are very
real; and though model-boiler explosions are fortunately rare, if they do
occur they may be extremely disastrous.

Therefore the following warnings:--

(1.) Do not use tins or thin sheet iron for boilers. One cannot tell how
far internal corrosion has gone. The scaling of 1/100 inch of metal off a
"tin" is obviously vastly more serious than the same diminution in the
thickness of, say, a 1/4-inch plate. Brass and copper are the metals to
employ, as they do not deteriorate at all provided a proper water supply be
maintained.

(2.) If in doubt, make the boiler much more solid than is needed, rather
than run any risks.

(3.) Fit a steam gauge, so that you may know what is happening.

(4.) Test your boiler under steam, and don't work it at more than half the
pressure to which it has been tested. (See p. 220.)

In the present chapter we will assume that the barrels of all the boilers
described are made out of solid-drawn seamless copper tubing, which can be
bought in all diameters up to 6 inches, and of any one of several
thicknesses. Brass tubing is more easily soldered, but not so good to
braze, and generally not so strong as copper, other things being equal.
Solid-drawn tubing is more expensive than welded tubing or an equivalent
amount of sheet metal, but is considerably stronger than the best riveted
tube.

Boiler ends may be purchased ready turned to size. Get stampings rather
than castings, as the first are more homogeneous, and therefore can be
somewhat lighter.

Flanging Boiler Ends.--To make a good job, a plate for an end should be
screwed to a circular block of hard wood (oak or boxwood), having an
outside diameter less than the inside diameter of the boiler barrel by
twice the thickness of the metal of the end, and a rounded-off edge. The
plate must be annealed by being heated to a dull red and dipped in cold
water. The process must be repeated should the hammering make the copper
stubborn.

Stays should be used liberally, and be screwed and nutted at the ends. As
the cutting of the screw thread reduces the effective diameter, the
strength of a stay is only that of the section at the bottom of the
threads.

Riveting.--Though stays will prevent the ends of the boiler blowing off,
it is very advisable to rivet them through the flanges to the ends of the
barrel, as this gives mutual support independently of soldering or brazing.
Proper boiler rivets should be procured, and annealed before use. Make the
rivet holes a good fit, and drill the two parts to be held together in one
operation, to ensure the holes being in line. Rivets will not close
properly if too long. Dies for closing the rivet heads may be bought for a
few pence.

Soldering, etc.--Joints not exposed directly to the furnace flames may be
soldered with a solder melting not below 350 degrees Fahr. Surfaces to be
riveted together should be "tinned" before riveting, to ensure the solder
getting a good hold afterwards. The solder should be sweated right through
the joint with a blow-lamp to make a satisfactory job.

All joints exposed to the flames should be silver-soldered, and other
joints as well if the working pressure is to exceed 50 lbs. to the square
inch. Silver-soldering requires the use of a powerful blow--lamp or
gas-jet; ordinary soft soldering bits and temperatures are ineffective.
Brazing is better still, but should be done by an expert, who may be relied
on not to burn the metal. It is somewhat risky to braze brass, which melts
at a temperature not far above that required to fuse the spelter (brass
solder). Getting the prepared parts of a boiler silver-soldered or brazed
together is inexpensive, and is worth the money asked.

[Illustration: FIG. 78.]


Some Points in Design.

The efficiency of a boiler is governed chiefly (1) by the amount of heating
surface exposed to the flames; (2) by the distribution of the heating
surface; (3) by the amount of fuel which can be burnt in the furnace in a
given time; (4) by avoiding wastage of heat.

The simplest form of boiler, depicted in Fig. 78, is extremely inefficient
because of its small heating surface. A great deal of the heat escapes
round the sides and the ends of the boiler. Moreover, a good deal of the
heat which passes into the water is radiated out again, as the boiler is
exposed directly to the air.

Fig. 79 shows a great improvement in design. The boiler is entirely
enclosed, except at one end, so that the hot gases get right round the
barrel, and the effective heating surface has been more than doubled by
fitting a number of water-tubes, aaa, bbbb, which lie right in the flames,
and absorb much heat which would otherwise escape. The tubes slope upwards
from the chimney end, where the heat is less, to the fire-door end, where
the heat is fiercer, and a good circulation is thus assured. The Babcock
and Wilcox boiler is the highest development of this system, which has
proved very successful, and may be recommended for model boilers of all
sizes. The heating surface may be increased indefinitely by multiplying the
number of tubes. If a solid fuel-coal, coke, charcoal, etc.-fire is used,
the walls of the casing should be lined with asbestos or fire-clay to
prevent the metal being burnt away.

[Illustration: FIG. 79--Side and end elevations of a small water-tube
boiler.]

The horizontal boiler has an advantage over the vertical in that, for an
equal diameter of barrel, it affords a larger water surface, and is,
therefore, less subject to "priming," which means the passing off of minute
globules of water with the steam. This trouble, very likely to occur if the
boiler has to run an engine too large for it, means a great loss of
efficiency, but it may be partly cured by making the steam pass through
coils exposed to the furnace gases on its way to the engine. This
"superheating" evaporates the globules and dries the steam, besides raising
its temperature. The small water-tube is preferable to the small fire-tube
connecting furnace and chimney, as its surface is exposed more directly to
the flames; also it increases, instead of decreasing, the total volume of
water in the boiler.


A Vertical Boiler.

[Illustration: FIG. 80.--Details of vertical boiler.]

The vertical boiler illustrated by Fig. 80 is easily made. The absence of a
water jacket to the furnace is partly compensated by fitting six
water-tubes in the bottom. As shown, the barrel is 8 inches long and 6
inches in outside diameter, and the central flue 1-1/2 inches across
outside solid-drawn 1/16-inch tubing, flanged ends, and four 1/4-inch
stays--disposed as indicated in Fig. 80 (a) and (b)--are used. The 5/16 or
3/8 inch water-tubes must be annealed and filled with lead or resin before
being bent round wooden templates. After bending, run the resin or lead out
by heating. The outflow end of each pipe should project half an inch or so
further through the boiler bottom than the inflow end.

Mark out and drill the tube holes in the bottom, and then the flue hole,
for which a series of small holes must be made close together inside the
circumference and united with a fret saw. Work the hole out carefully till
the flue, which should be slightly tapered at the end, can be driven
through an eighth of an inch or so. The flue hole in the top should be made
a good fit, full size.

Rivet a collar, x (Fig. 80, a), of strip brass 1/4 inch above the bottom of
the flue to form a shoulder. Another collar, y (Fig. 80, c), is needed for
the flue above the top plate. Put the ends and flue temporarily in place,
mark off the position of y, and drill half a dozen 5/32-inch screw holes
through y and the flue. Also drill screw holes to hold the collar to the
boiler top.

The steam-pipe is a circle of  5/16-inch copper tube, having one end
closed, and a number of small holes bored in the upper side to collect the
steam from many points at once. The other end is carried through the side
of the boiler.

[Illustration: FIG. 81.--Perspective view of horizontal boiler mounted on
wooden base.]

Assembling.--The order of assembling is:--Rivet in the bottom; put the
steam-pipe in place; rivet in the top; insert the flue, and screw collar y
to the top; expand the bottom of the flue by hammering so that it cannot be
withdrawn; insert the stays and screw them up tight; silver-solder both
ends of the flue, the bottom ends of the stays, and the joint between
bottom and barrel. The water-tubes are then inserted and silver-soldered,
and one finishes by soft-soldering the boiler top to the barrel and fixing
in the seatings for the water and steam gauges, safety-valve, mud-hole,
filler, and pump-if the last is fitted.

The furnace is lined with a strip of stout sheet iron, 7 inches wide and
19-1/4 inches long, bent round the barrel, which it overlaps for an inch
and a half. Several screws hold lining and barrel together. To promote
efficiency, the furnace and boiler is jacketed with asbestos--or
fire-clay round the furnace--secured by a thin outer cover. The enclosing
is a somewhat troublesome business, but results in much better steaming
power, especially in cold weather. Air-holes must be cut round the bottom
of the lining to give good ventilation.

A boiler of this size will keep a 1 by 1-1/2 inch cylinder well supplied
with steam at from 30 to 40 lbs. per square inch.


A Horizontal Boiler.

[Illustration: FIG. 82.--Longitudinal section of large water-tube
boiler.]

The boiler illustrated by Fig. 81 is designed for heating with a large
paraffin or petrol blow-lamp. It has considerably greater water capacity,
heating surface--the furnace being entirely enclosed--and water surface
than the boiler just described. The last at high-water level is about 60,
and at low-water level 70, square inches.

The vertical section (Fig. 82) shows 1/16-inch barrel, 13 inches long over
all and 12 inches long between the end plates, and 6 inches in diameter.
The furnace flue is 2-1/2 inches across outside, and contains eleven
1/2-inch cross tubes, set as indicated by the end view (Fig. 83), and 3/4
inch apart, centre to centre. This arrangement gives a total heating
surface of about 140 square inches. If somewhat smaller tubes are used and
doubled (see Fig. 84), or even trebled, the heating surface may be
increased to 180-200 square inches. With a powerful blow-lamp this boiler
raises a lot of steam.

Tubing the Furnace Flue.--Before any of the holes are made, the lines on
which the centres lie must be scored from end to end of the flue on the
outside. The positions of these lines are quickly found as follows:--Cut
out a strip of paper exactly as long as the circumference of the tube, and
plot the centre lines on it. The paper is then applied to the tube again,
and poppet marks made with a centre punch opposite to or through the marks
on the paper. Drive a wire-nail through a piece of square wood and sharpen
the point. Lay the flue on a flat surface, apply the end of the nail to one
of the poppet marks, and draw it along the flue, which must be held quite
firmly. When all the lines have been scored, the centring of the water
tubes is a very easy matter.

[Illustration: FIG. 83.-End of horizontal boiler, showing position of holes
for stays and fittings.]

The two holes for any one tube should be bored independently, with a drill
somewhat smaller than the tube, and be opened to a good fit with a reamer
or broach passed through both holes to ensure their sides being in line.
Taper the tubes--2-7/8 inches long each--slightly at one end, and make
one of the holes a bit smaller than the other. The tapered end is passed
first through the larger hole and driven home in the other, but not so
violently as to distort the flue. If the tubes are made fast in this way,
the subsequent silver-soldering will be all the easier.

[Illustration: FIG. 84.--Doubled cross tubes In horizontal boiler flue.]

The Steam Dome.--The large holes--2 inches in diameter--required for
the steam dome render it necessary to strengthen the barrel at this point.
Cut out a circular plate of metal 4 inches across, make a central hole of
the size of the steam dome, and bend the plate to the curve of the inside
of the barrel. Tin the contact faces of the barrel and  "patch" and draw
them together with screws or rivets spaced as shown in Fig. 85, and sweat
solder into the joint. To make it impossible for the steam dome to blowout,
let it extend half an inch through the barrel, and pass a piece of 1/4-inch
brass rod through it in contact with the barrel. The joint is secured with
hard solder. Solder the top of the dome in 1/8 inch below the end of the
tube, and burr the end over. The joint should be run again afterwards to
ensure its being tight.

[Illustration: FIG. 85.--Showing how to mark out strengthening patch
round steam dome hole.]

The positions of stays and gauges is shown in Fig. 83.

Chimney.--This should be an elbow of iron piping fitting the inside of
the flue closely, made up of a 9-inch and a 4-inch part. The last slips
into the end of the flue; the first may contain a coil for superheating the
steam.


A Multitubular Boiler.

[Illustration: FIG. 86.--Cross section of multitubular boiler.]

Figs. 86 and 87 are respectively end and side elevations of a multitubular
boiler having over 600 square inches of heating surface--most of it
contributed by the tubes--and intended for firing with solid fuel.

The boiler has a main water-drum, A, 5 inches in diameter and 18 inches
long, and two smaller water-drums, B and C, 2-1/2 by 18 inches, connected
by two series of tubes, G and H, each set comprising 20 tubes. The H tubes
are not exposed to the fire so directly as the G tubes, but as they enter
the main drum at a higher point, the circulation is improved by uniting A
to B and C at both ends by large 1-inch drawn tubes, F. In addition, B and
C are connected by three 3/4-inch cross tubes, E, which prevent the small
drums spreading, and further equalize the water supply. A 1-1/2-inch drum,
D, is placed on the top of A to collect the steam at a good distance from
the water.

Materials.--In addition to 1-1/2 feet of 5 by 3/32 inch solid-drawn
tubing for the main, and 3 feet of 2-1/2 by 1/16  inch tubing for the lower
drums, the boiler proper requires 22-1/2 feet of  1/2-inch tubing, 19
inches of 3/4-inch tubing, 2-1/4 feet of 1-inch tubing, 1 foot of
1-1/2-inch tubing, and ends of suitable size for the four drums.

[Illustration: FIG. 87.--Longitudinal section of multitubular boiler.]


CONSTRUCTION.

[Illustration: FIG. 88.-Two arrangements for tube holes in multi tubular
boiler.]

The centres for the water-tubes, G and H, should be laid out, in accordance
with Fig. 88, on the tops of  B and C and the lower part of A, along lines
scribed in the manner explained on p. 207. Tubes H must be bent to a
template to get them all of the same shape and length, and all the tubes be
prepared before any are put in place. If the tubes are set 7/8 inch apart,
centre to centre, instead of 1-1/4 inches, the heating surface will be
greatly increased and the furnace casing better protected.

Assembling.--When all necessary holes have been made and are of the
correct size, begin by riveting and silver-soldering in the ends of the
drums. Next fix the cross tubes, E, taking care that they and B and C form
rectangles. Then slip the F, G, and H tubes half an inch into the main
drum, and support A, by means of strips passed between the G and H tubes,
in its correct position relatively to B and C. The E tubes can now be
pushed into B and C and silver-soldered. The supports may then be removed,
and the a and H tubes be got into position and secured. Drum D then demands
attention. The connecting tubes, KK, should be silver-soldered in, as the
boiler, if properly made, can be worked at pressures up to 100 lbs. per
square inch.

The casing is of 1/20-inch sheet iron, and in five parts. The back end must
be holed to allow A, B, and C to project 1 inch, and have a furnace-door
opening, and an airway at the bottom, 5 inches wide and 1 inch deep, cut in
it. The airway may be provided with a flap, to assist in damping down the
fire if too much steam is being raised. In the front end make an inspection
opening to facilitate cleaning the tubes and removing cinders, etc.

The side plates, m m, are bent as shown in Fig. 86, and bolted to a
semicircular top plate, n, bent to a radius of 6 inches. A slot, 1-1/2
inches wide and 11-1/2 inches long, must be cut in the top, n, to allow it
to be passed over drum D; and there must also be a 3 or 3-1/2 inch hole for
the chimney. A plate, p, covers in D. A little plate, o, is slipped over
the slot in n, and asbestos is packed in all round D. The interior of the
end, side, and the top plates should be lined with sheet asbestos held on
by large tin washers and screw bolts. To protect the asbestos, movable iron
sheets may be interposed on the furnace side. These are replaced easily if
burnt away. The pieces m m are bent out at the bottom, and screwed down to
a base-plate extending the whole length of the boiler.

The fire-bars fill the rectangle formed by the tubes B, El, and E2. A plate
extends from the top of E2 to the front plate of the casing, to prevent the
furnace draught being "short circuited."


Boiler Fittings.

[Illustration: FIG. 89.-Safety valve.]

Safety Valves.--The best all-round type is that shown in Fig. 89. There
is no danger of the setting being accidentally altered, as is very possible
with a lever and sliding weight. The valve should be set by the steam
gauge. Screw it down, and raise steam to the point at which you wish the
safety valve to act, and then slacken off the regulating nuts until steam
issues freely. The lock nuts under the cross-bar should then be tightened
up. In the case of a boiler with a large heating surface, which makes steam
quickly, it is important that the safety-valve should be large enough to
master the steam. If the valve is too small, the pressure may rise to a
dangerous height, even with the steam coming out as fast as the valve can
pass it.

[Illustration: FIG. 90.-Steam gauge and siphon.]

Steam Gauges.--The steam gauge should register pressures considerably
higher than that to be used, so that there may be no danger of the boiler
being forced unwittingly beyond the limit registered. A siphon piece should
be interposed between boiler and gauge (Fig. 90), to protect the latter
from the direct action of the steam. Water condenses in the siphon, and
does not become very hot.

[Illustration: FIG. 91.-Water gauge.]

Water Gauges should have three taps (Fig. 91), two between glass and
boiler, to cut off the water if the glass should burst, and one for blowing
off through. Very small gauges are a mistake, as the water jumps about in a
small tube. When fitting a gauge, put packings between the bushes and the
glass-holders, substitute a piece of metal rod for the glass tube, and pack
the rod tightly. If the bushes are now sweated into the boiler end while
thus directed, the gauge must be in line for the glass. This method is
advisable in all cases, and is necessary if the boiler end is not perfectly
flat.

Pumps.--Where a pump is used, the supply should enter the boiler below
low-water level through a non-return valve fitted with a tap, so that water
can be prevented from blowing back through the pump. As regards the
construction of pumps, the reader is referred to p. 164 and to Chapter
XXII.

Filling Caps.--The filling cap should be large enough to take the nozzle
of a good-sized funnel with some room to spare. Beat the nozzle out of
shape, to give room for the escape of the air displaced by the water.

The best form of filling cap has a self-seating ground plug, which, if
properly made, is steam-tight without any packing. If needed, asbestos
packing can easily be inserted between plug and cap.

Mud-holes.--All but the smallest boilers should have a mud-hole and plug
in the bottom at a point not directly exposed to the furnace. In Fig. 82 it
is situated at the bottom of the barrel. In Figs. 86 and 87 there should be
a mud-hole in one end of each of the three drums, A, B, and C. The plug may
be bored at the centre for a blow-off cock, through which the boiler
should be emptied after use, while steam is up, and after the fire has been
"drawn." Emptying in this way is much quicker than when there is no
pressure, and it assists to keep the boiler free from sediment.

[Illustration: FIG. 92.--Steam cock.]

Steam Cocks.-The screw-down type (Fig. 92) is very preferable to the "plug"
type, which is apt to leak and stick.

Testing Boilers.--The tightness of the joints of a boiler is best tested
in the first instance by means of compressed air. Solder on an all-metal
cycle valve, "inflate" the boiler to a considerable pressure, and submerge
it in a tub of water. The slightest leak will be betrayed by a string of
bubbles coming directly from the point of leakage. Mark any leaks by plain
scratches, solder them up, and test again.

[Illustration: FIG. 94.--Benzoline lamp for model central-flue boiler.]

The boiler should then be quite filled with cold water, and heated
gradually until the pressure gauge has risen to over the working pressure.
There is no risk of an explosion, as the volume of the water is increased
but slightly.

The third test is the most important and most risky of all-namely, that
conducted under steam to a pressure well above the working pressure.

In order to carry out the test without risk, one needs to be able to watch
the steam-gauge from a considerable distance, and to have the fire under
control. My own method is to set the boiler out in the open, screw down the
safety-valve so that it cannot lift, and raise steam with the help of a
blow-lamp, to which a string is attached wherewith to pull it backwards
along a board. If the boiler is to be worked at 50 lbs., I watch the steam
gauge through a telescope until 100 lbs. is recorded, then draw the lamp
away. After passing the test, the boiler, when pressure has fallen, say, 20
lbs., may safely be inspected at close quarters for leaks.

This test is the only quite satisfactory one, as it includes the influence
of high temperature, which has effects on the metal not shown by "cold"
tests, such as the hydraulic.

Do not increase your working pressure without first re-testing the boiler
to double the new pressure to be used.

Fuels.--For very small stationary boilers the methylated spirit lamp is
best suited, as it is smell-less, and safe if the reservoir be kept well
apart from the burner and the supply is controllable by a tap or valve.
(See Fig. 104.)

[Illustration: FIG. 95.-Paraffin burner for vertical boiler.]

For medium-sized model boilers, and for small launch boilers, benzoline or
petrol blow-lamps and paraffin stoves have become very popular, as they do
away with stoking, and the amount of heat is easily regulated by governing
the fuel supply. Fig. 94 is a sketch of a blow-lamp suitable for the
horizontal boiler shown on pp. 204, and 206, while Fig. 95 shows a
convenient form of paraffin stove with silent "Primus" burner, which may be
used for a horizontal with considerable furnace space or for vertical
boilers. In the case of all these liquid fuel consumers, the amount of heat
developed can be increased by augmenting the number of burners. Where a gas
supply is available its use is to be recommended for small stationary
boilers.

Solid Fuels.--The chief disadvantages attaching to these are smoke and
fumes; but as a solid fuel gives better results than liquid in a large
furnace, it is preferred under certain conditions, one of them being that
steam is not raised in a living room. Charcoal, coke, anthracite coal, and
ordinary coal partly burned are the fuels to use, the fire being started
with a liberal supply of embers from an open fire. Every solid-fuel boiler
should have a steam-blower in the chimney for drawing up the fire; and if a
really fierce blaze is aimed at, the exhaust from the engine should be
utilized for the same purpose.



XIX. QUICK BOILING KETTLES.

[Transcriber's note: Do not use lead solder on articles associated with
human or animal consumption.]

The principles of increasing the area of heating surface in model boilers
may be applied very practically to the common kettle. The quick-boiling
kettle is useful for camping out, for heating the morning tea water of the
very early riser, and for the study "brew," which sometimes has to be made
in a hurry; and, on occasion, it will be so welcome in the kitchen as to
constitute a very useful present to the mistress of the house.

As the putting in of the tubes entails some trouble, it is worth while to
select a good kettle for treatment. Get one that is made of thick tinned
sheet iron (cast-iron articles are unsuitable), or even of copper, if you
are intent on making a handsome gift which will last indefinitely. The
broad shallow kettle is best suited for tubing, as it naturally has a fair
heating surface, and its bottom area gives room for inserting plenty of
tubes. Also, the tubes can be of good length. Let us, therefore, assume
that the kettle will be of at least 8 inches diameter.

In Figs. 96 (a) and 96 (b) are shown two forms of fire-tube kettles (a and
b) and two of water-tube (c and d). For use over a spirit or Swedish
petroleum stove the first two types are most convenient; the third will
work well on a stove or an open fire; and the last proves very efficient on
an open fire. One may take it that, as a general rule, areas of heating
surface being equal, the water-tube kettle will boil more quickly than the
fire-tube.


Fire-tube Kettles.

The tubing of Figs. 96 (a) and 96 (b) presents a little difficulty in each
case. The straight tube is the more difficult to insert, owing to the
elliptical shape of the ends; whereas the bent tube requires only circular
holes, but must be shaped on a template.

The tubing used for (a) should have at least 5/8-inch internal diameter,
for (b) 1/2 inch, and be of thin copper. Hot gases will not pass willingly
through tubes much smaller than this, in the absence of induced or forced
draught.

For convenience in fitting, the tubes should run at an angle of 45 degrees
to the bottom and side of the kettle, as this gives the same bevel at each
end. Find the centre of the bottom, and through it scratch plainly four
diameters 45 degrees apart. From their ends draw perpendiculars up the side
of the kettle.

[Illustration: FIG. 96 (a).]

Now draw on a piece of paper a section of the kettle, and from what is
selected as a convenient water-level run a line obliquely, at an angle of
45 degrees, from the side to the bottom. Measuring off from this diagram,
you can establish the points in the side and bottom at which the upper and
longer side of the tubes should emerge. Mark these off.

Next bevel off a piece of tubing to an angle of 45 degrees, cutting off
roughly in the first instance and finishing up carefully with a file till
the angle is exact. Solder to the end a piece of tin, and cut and file this
to the precise shape of the elliptical end. Detach by heating, scribe a
line along its longest axis, and attach it by a small countersunk screw to
the end of a convenient handle.

Place this template in turn on each of the eight radii, its long axis in
line with it, being careful that the plate is brought up to the marks
mentioned above, and is on the bottom corner side of it. Scratch round
plainly with a fine steel point.

To remove the metal for a tube hole, it is necessary to drill a succession
of almost contiguous holes as near the scratch as possible without actually
cutting it. When the ring is completed, join the holes with a cold chisel
held obliquely. Then file carefully with a round file, just not cutting the
scratch. As the side of the hole nearest to the bottom corner should run
obliquely to enable the tube to pass, work this out with the file held at
an angle.

As soon as a pair of holes (one in the bottom, the other in the side) have
been made, true up the side hole until a piece of tubing will run through
it at the correct angle. Then bevel off the end to 45 degrees and pass the
tube through again, bringing the bevel up against the bottom hole from the
inside. If it is a trifle difficult to pass, bevel off the edge slightly on
the inside to make a fairly easy driving fit. (Take care not to bulge the
bottom of the kettle.) Mark off the tube beyond the side hole, allowing an
eighth of an inch extra. Cut at the mark, and number tube and hole, so that
they may be paired correctly later on.

When all the tubes are fitted, "tin" the ends with a wash of solder before
returning them to their holes. If there is a gap at any point wide enough
to let the solder run through, either beat out the tube from the inside
into contact, or, if this is impracticable, place a bit of brass wire in
the gap. Use powdered resin by preference as flux for an iron kettle, as it
does not cause the rusting produced by spirit of salt. If the latter is
used, wipe over the solder with a strong ammonia or soda solution, in order
to neutralize the acid.

As the hot gases may tend to escape too quickly through large tubes, it is
well to insert in the upper end of each a small "stop," x--a circle of
tin with an arc cut away on the bottom side. To encourage the gases to pass
up the tubes instead of along the bottom, a ring of metal, y, may be
soldered beyond the bottom holes, if an oil or spirit stove is to be used.
This ring should have notches cut along the kettle edge, so as not to
throttle the flame too much.

[Illustration: FIG. 96--(b), (c), and (d).]

As the tubes for these require bending to shape in each case, the three
types may be grouped together. The tubes of c and d, which require bending
to somewhat sharp curves, may be of 3/8-inch internal diameter. In the last
two cases the direction of the water travel is shown. The up-flow end,
which projects farther through the bottom than the down-flow, is nearer the
centre, where, if a gas stove is used, the heat is more intense than at the
circumference of the bottom. (Note.-If type c is for use on a three-support
stove, increase the number of tubes to 9, equally spaced, 40 degrees apart,
so that the kettle may be adjusted easily.)

The copper tubing should be annealed or softened by heating to a dull red
and plunging in cold water. Cut a wooden template of the exact outline of
the inside line of the shape that the tube is to assume, and secure this
firmly to a board. Fill the tube with melted resin, to prevent, as much as
possible, "buckling" or flattening on the curves. The tube must be kept up
to the template by a stop of hard wood, at the end at which bending
commences. Don't cut the tube into lengths before bending, as short pieces
are more difficult to handle. When a piece sufficient for a tube has been
bent, cut it oft, and remove the resin by heating.

The fitting of the tubes is an easy matter, as the holes are circular. Pair
off a tube with its holes and number it. A fluted reamer will be found
invaluable for enlarging them to the correct size. Tin all tubes at points
where they are to be attached to the kettle.

In Fig. 96 (c) and (d) care should be taken to make all the tubes project
the same distance, so that the kettle may be level when resting on them.



XX.  A HOT-AIR ENGINE.

The pretty little toy about to be described is interesting as a practical
application to power-producing purposes of the force exerted by expanding
air. It is easy to make, and, for mere demonstration purposes, has an
advantage over a steam-engine of the same size in that it can be set
working in less than a minute, and will continue to act as long as a small
spirit flame is kept burning beneath it; it cannot explode; and its
construction is a simpler matter than the building of a steam-engine.

[Illustration: FIG. 97.--Vertical section of hot-air engine.]

Principles of the Hot-air Engine.--Fig. 97 gives a sectional view of the
engine. The place of what would be the boiler in a steam-engine of similar
shape is taken by an air chamber immediately above the lamp, and above that
is a chamber through which cold water circulates. In what we will call the
heating chamber a large piston, known as the displacer, is moved up and
down by a rod D and a connecting rod CR1. This piston does not touch the
sides of the chamber, so that the bulk of the air is pushed past it from
one end of the chamber to the other as the piston moves. When the displacer
is in the position shown--at the top of its stroke--the air is heated
by contact with the hot plate C, and expands, forcing up the piston of the
power cylinder, seen on the left of the engine. (The power crank and the
displacer crank are, it should be mentioned, set at right angles to one
another.) During the second half of the power stroke the displacer is moved
downwards, causing some of the air to pass round it into contact with the
cold plate D. It immediately contracts, and reduces the pressure on the
power piston by the time that the piston has finished its stroke. When the
power piston has reached the middle of its downward stroke, the displacer
is at its lowest position, but is halfway up again when the power piston is
quite down. The air is once again displaced downwards, and the cycle begins
anew. The motive power is, therefore, provided by the alternate heating and
cooling of the same air.

Construction.--The barrel and supports were made out of a single piece of
thin brass tubing, 2-7/16 inch internal diameter and 5-5/8 inch long. The
heating end was filed up true, the other cut and filed to the shape
indicated in Fig. 98 by dotted lines. The marking out was accomplished with
the help of a strip of paper exactly as wide as the length of the tube, and
as long as the tube's circumference. This strip had a line ruled parallel
to one of its longer edges, and 2-1/2 inches from it, and was then folded
twice, parallel to a shorter edge. A design like the shaded part of Fig. 98
was drawn on an end fold, and all the four folds cut through along this
line with a pair of scissors. When opened out, the paper appeared as in
Fig. 98.

[Illustration: FIG. 98.]

We now--to pass into the present tense--wrap this pattern round the
tube and scratch along its edges. The metal is removed from the two hollows
by cutting out roughly with a hack saw and finishing up to the lines with a
file.

The next things to take in hand are the displacer rod D and the guide tube
in which it works. These must make so good a fit that when slightly
lubricated they shall prevent the passage of air between them and yet set
up very little friction. If you cannot find a piece of steel rod and brass
tubing which fit close enough naturally, the only alternative is to rub
down a rod, slightly too big to start with, until it will just move freely
in the tube. This is a somewhat tedious business, but emery cloth will do
it. The rod should be 3-3/8 inches, the tube 2-1/8 inches, long. I used rod
3/16 inch in diameter; but a smaller rod would do equally well.

[Illustration: FIG. 99.]

The two plates, A and B, are next prepared by filing or turning down thin
brass[1] discs to a tight fit. (Note.--For turning down, the disc should
be soldered centrally to a piece of accurately square brass rod, which can
be gripped in a chuck. I used a specially-made holder like that shown in
Fig. 99 for this purpose.)

[Footnote 1: Thin iron plate has the disadvantage of soon corroding.]

When a good fit has been obtained, solder the two discs together so that
they coincide exactly, and bore a central hole to fit the guide tube
tightly. Before separating the plates make matching marks, so that the same
parts may lie in the same direction when they are put in position. This
will ensure the guide tube being parallel to the barrel.

The power cylinder is a piece of brass tubing 2 inches long and of 7/8-inch
internal diameter. The piston is of 7/8-inch tubing, fitting the cylinder
easily, and thick enough to allow a shallow packing recess to be turned in
the outside. Brass washers turned or filed to size form the ends of
cylinder and piston. The connecting rod CR2 is a piece of strip brass,
3-3/16 inches long, between centres of holes. This had better be cut off a
bit long in the first instance, and be fitted to the little stirrup which
attaches its lower end to the piston. The drilling of the crank pinhole
should be deferred till the cylinder and crank are in position.

[Illustration: FIG. 100.--Exterior view of hot air engine.]

Putting in the Water-chamber Discs.--Clean the inside of the barrel
thoroughly with sandpaper; also discs A and B round the edges and the
central holes. Disc A is forced in from the crank end a little further down
than it is to be finally, and then driven up from below until at all points
its lower side is exactly three inches from the bottom edge of the barrel.
Disc B is then forced up 1-1/2 inches from the bottom end. The guide tube--
which should have been cleaned--having been driven into place, solder is
run all round the joints. If the barrel is heated over a spirit lamp, this
operation is performed very quickly. ("Tinol" soldering paste is
recommended.) Before soldering in B, drill a small hole in the barrel
between A and B to allow the air to escape.

Attaching the Cylinder.--Scratch a bold line through the centre of one of
the crank holes to the bottom of the barrel, to act as guide. Drill a
5/32-inch hole in the barrel on this line just below plate B, and a similar
hole in the bottom of the cylinder. (The cylinder end should be put in
position temporarily while this is done to prevent distortion.) Flatten
down the cylinder slightly on the line of the hole, so that it may lie
snugly against the barrel, and clean the outside of the barrel. Lay the
cylinder against the barrel with the holes opposite one another, and push a
short piece of wood through to exclude solder from the holes and keep the
holes in line. Half a dozen turns of fine wire strained tightly round
cylinder and barrel will hold the cylinder in place while soldering is done
with a bit or lamp. The end of the cylinder should then be made fast.

The Displacer.--This is a circular block of wood--well dried before
turning--5/8 inch thick and 3/32 inch less in diameter than the inside of
the barrel. The rod hole in it should be bored as truly central as
possible. A hole is drilled edgeways through the block and through the rod
to take a pin to hold the two together. To prevent it splitting with the
heat, make a couple of grooves in the sides to accommodate a few turns of
fine copper wire, the twisted ends of which should be beaten down flush
with the outside of the block. The bottom of the block is protected by a
disc of asbestos card held up to the wood by a disc of tin nailed on.

The Crank Shaft and Crank.--The central crank of the crank shaft--that
for the displacer--has a "throw" of 1/4 inch, as the full travel of the
displacer is 1/2 inch. If the bending of a rod to the proper shape is
beyond the reader's capacity, he may build up a crank in the manner shown
in Fig. 101. Holes for the shaft are bored near the tops of the supports,
and the shaft is put in place. After this has been done, smoke the shaft in
a candle flame and solder two small bits of tubing, or bored pieces of
brass, to the outside of the supports to increase the length of the
bearing. The power-crank boss is a 1-1/2-inch brass disc. This crank has a
"throw" of 1/2 inch.

[Illustration:  FIG. 101.-Details of built-up crank.]

Connecting Rods.--Put a piece of card 1/16 inch thick in the bottom of
the cylinder and push the piston home. Turn the power crank down and mark
off the centre of the hole for the crank pin in the connecting rod CR2.
Solder a piece of strip brass on each side of the rod at this point;
measure again, and drill.

The top of the displacer rod D is now filed flat on two sides and drilled.
Slip a ring 1/16 inch thick over the rod and push the rod upwards through
the guide tube till the displacer can go no farther. Turn the displacer
crank up and measure from the centre of the hole in the rod to the centre
of the crank. The top of the connecting rod should be filed to fit the
under side of the crank, against which it should be held by a little
horseshoe-shaped strap pinned on. (Fig. 102). (Be sure to remove the ring
after it has served its purpose.)

The Water Circulation.--The water chamber is connected by two rubber
tubes with an external tank. In Fig. 97 the cooling water tank is shown,
for illustrative purposes, on the fly-wheel side of the engine, but can be
placed more conveniently behind the engine, as it were. Two short nozzles,
E1 and E2, of 1/4-inch tube are soldered into the water chamber near the
top and bottom for the rubber pipes to be slipped over, and two more on the
water tank. For the tank one may select a discarded 1 lb. carbide tin. Cut
off the top and solder on a ring of brass wire; make all the joints
water-tight with solder, and give the tin a couple of coatings of paint
inside and outside.

[Illustration: FIG. 102.]

Closing the Hot-air Chamber.--When all the parts except the lamp chamber
have been prepared, assemble them to make sure that everything is in order.
The lower end of the hot-air chamber has then to be made air-tight.
Soldering is obviously useless here, as the heat of the lamp would soon
cause the solder to run, and it is impossible to make a brazed joint
without unsoldering the joints in the upper parts of the engine. I was a
bit puzzled over the problem, and solved it by means of the lower part of
an old tooth-powder box stamped out of a single piece of tin. This made a
tight fit on the outside of the barrel, and as it was nearly an inch deep,
I expected that if it were driven home on the barrel and soldered to it the
joint would be too near the water chamber to be affected by the lamp. This
has proved to be the case, even when the water is nearly at boiling point.
If a very close-fitting box is not procurable, the space between box and
barrel must be filled in with a strip of tin cut off to the correct length.

The Lamp Chamber.--Cut out a strip of tin 4 inches wide and 1 inch longer
than the circumference of the lower end of the hot-air chamber. Scratch a
line 1/2 inch from one of the sides, a line 3/4 inch from the other, and a
line 1/2 inch from each of the ends.

A lamp hole is cut in the centre, and ventilation holes 1 inch apart, as
shown in Fig. 103. If the latter holes are made square or triangular (base
uppermost), and the metal is cut with a cold chisel so as to leave the side
nearest the edge unsevered, the parts may be turned up to form supports for
the barrel.

[Illustration: FIG. 103.--Plate for lamp chamber cut out ready for
bending.]

The slit lower side of the plate is splayed out into a series of "feet," by
three or more of which, the chamber is secured to the base. Bend the plate
round the barrel and put the two screws and bolts which hold the ends in
place, and tighten them until the barrel is gripped firmly. Screw the
engine to its base, fit on the rubber water connections, and fasten down
the tank by a screw through the centre of the bottom. The screw should pass
through a brass washer, between which and the tank should be interposed a
rubber washer to make a water-tight joint.

The Lamp.--The lamp shown in Fig. 104 was made out of a truncated brass
elbow, a piece of  5/16-inch brass tube, and a round tin box holding about
1/3-pint of methylated spirit. A tap interposed between the reservoir and
burner assists regulation of the flame, and prevents leakage when the lamp
is not in use.

Running the Engine.--The power and displacer cranks must be set exactly
at right angles to one another, and the first be secured by soldering or
otherwise to the crank shaft. The fly wheel will revolve in that direction
in which the displacer crank is 90 degrees ahead of the other.

[Illustration: FIG. l04.-Spirit lamp for hot-air engine, with regulating
tap.]

The packing of the piston should be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage
of air, but not to cause undue friction. When the packing has settled into
place, an occasional drop of oil in the cylinder and guide tube will assist
to make the piston and slide air-tight.

The engine begins to work a quarter of a minute or so after the lamp is
lit, and increases its speed up to a certain point, say 300 revolutions per
minute. When the water becomes very hot it may be changed. The power might
be applied, through demultiplying gear, to a small pump drawing water from
the bottom of the tank and forcing it through the water chamber and a
bent-over stand pipe into the tank again. This will help to keep the water
cool, and will add to the interest of the exhibit by showing "work being
done."



XXI.  A WATER MOTOR.

FIG. 105 is a perspective view of a simple water motor which costs little
to make, and can be constructed by anybody able to use carpenter's tools
and a soldering iron. It will serve to drive a very small dynamo, or do
other work for which power on a small scale is required. A water supply
giving a pressure of 40 lbs. upwards per square inch must be available.

We begin operations by fashioning the case, which consists of three main
parts, the centre and two sides, held together by brass screws. For the
centre, select a piece of oak 1 inch thick. Mark off a square, 7 inches on
the side; find the centre of this, and describe a circle 5 inches in
diameter. A bulge is given to the circle towards one corner of the square,
at which the waste-pipe will be situated.

Cut out along the line with a keyhole saw. Then saw out the square of wood.
A 5/8-inch hole is now bored edgeways through the wood into the "bulge" for
the escape, and in what will be the top edge is drilled a 1/4-inch hole to
allow air to enter.

[Illustration: FIG. l05.--Simple water turbine.]

Cut out the sides, and screw them on to the centre at the four corners,
taking care that the grain runs the same way in all three pieces, so that
they may all expand or contract in the same direction. Plane off the edges
of the sides flush with the centre.

The parts should now be separated, after being marked so that they can be
reassembled correctly, and laid for a quarter of an hour in a pan of melted
paraffin wax, or, failing this, of vaseline, until the wood is thoroughly
impregnated. Reassemble the parts, and put in the rest of the holding
screws, which should have their heads countersunk flush with the wood.

[Illustration: FIG. 106.--Water turbine, with pulley side of casing
removed.]

For the shaft select a piece of steel rod 5/32 inch in diameter, and 3 or
4 inches long; for the bearings use two pieces, 3/4 inch long each, of
close-fitting brass tube. Now take a drill, very slightly smaller in
diameter than the bearings, and run holes right through the centres of, and
square to, the sides. Both holes should be drilled at one operation, so
that they may be in line.

With a wooden mallet drive the bearings, which should be tapered slightly
at the entering end, through the sides. Push the shaft through them. If it
refuses to pass, or, if passed, turns very unwillingly, the bearings must
be out of line; in which case the following operation will put things
right. Remove the bearing on the pulley side, and enlarge the hole
slightly. Then bore a hole in the centre of a metal disc, 1 inch in
diameter, to fit the bearing; and drill three holes for screws to hold the
disc against the case. Rub disc and bearing bright all over.

Replace the bearing in its hole, slip the disc over it, and push the shaft
through both bearings. Move the disc about until the shaft turns easily,
mark the screw holes, and insert the screws. Finally, solder the bearing to
the disc while the shaft is still in place.

The wheel is a flat brass disc 4 inches in diameter. Polish this, and
scratch on one side twelve equally spaced radii. At the end of each radius
a small cup, made by bending a piece of strip brass 1/4 inch wide and 1/2
inch long into an arc of a circle, is soldered with its extremities on the
scratch. A little "Tinol" soldering lamp (price 1s. 6d.) comes in very
handy here.

To fix the wheel of the shaft requires the use of a third small piece of
tubing, which should be turned off quite square at both ends. Slip this and
the wheel on the shaft, and make a good, firm, soldered joint. Note.--
Consult Fig. 107 for a general idea of the position of the wheel, which
must be kept just clear of the case by the near bearing.

[Illustration: FIG. 107.--Plan of water turbine, showing arrangement of
nozzle.]

The nozzle should be a straight, tapered tube of some kind--the nose of a
large oil can will serve the purpose. The exit must be small enough to
allow the water to leave it at high velocity; if too large, the efficiency
of the wheel will be diminished. To the rear end of the nozzle should be
soldered a piece of brass tubing, which will make a tight fit with the hose
pipe leading from the water supply. A few small brass rings soldered round
this piece will prevent the hose blowing off if well wired on the outside.

Now comes the boring of the hole for the nozzle. Fig. 106 shows the line it
should take horizontally, so that the water shall strike the uppermost
bucket just below the centre; while Fig. 107 indicates the obliquity needed
to make the stream miss the intervening bucket. A tapered broach should be
used to enlarge the hole gradually till the nozzle projects sufficiently.
If the line is not quite correct, the tip should be bent carefully in the
direction required. One must avoid distorting the orifice, which should be
perfectly circular; clean it out with a small twist drill of the proper
size.

A brass elbow, which may be purchased for a few pence, should be driven
into the waste hole, and a small shield be nailed under the air hole. A
couple of screwed-on cross pieces are required to steady the motor sideways
and raise the elbow clear of the ground.

The motor may be geared direct to a very small dynamo, if the latter is
designed to run at high speeds. If a geared-down drive is needed, a small
pulley--such as is used for blinds, and may be bought for a penny--should
be attached to the shaft, and a bootlace be employed as belt. Avoid
overloading the wheel, for if it is unable to run at a high speed it will
prove inefficient.

[Illustration: FIG. l08.-Water motor working a photographic dish-rocker.]

Lubrication.--The water will keep the bearings cool, but the bearings
should be well lubricated. The most convenient method of effecting this is
to bore holes in the bearings, and from them run small pipes to an oil
reservoir on the top of the case (as in Fig. 70), where they are fed on the
siphon principle through strands of worsted.

Alternative Construction.--If an all-metal case is preferred, the reader
might utilize the description given of a steam turbine on pp. 170-178. The
details there given will apply to water as well as steam, the one exception
being that a nozzle of the kind described above must be substituted for the
steam pipe and small ports.



XXII. MODEL PUMPS.

Every steam boiler which has to run for long periods and evaporate
considerable quantities of water should be in connection with a pump
capable of forcing water in against the highest pressure used. On a
previous page (p. 158) we have described a force pump driven directly off
the crank shaft of an engine. As the action of this is dependent on the
running of the engine, it is advisable, in cases where the boiler may have
to work an engine not provided with a pump of its own, to install an
independent auxiliary pump operated by hand or by steam, and of
considerable capacity, so that in an emergency water may be supplied
quickly.

[Illustration: FIG. l09.-Vertical section of force pump.]

Making a Hand pump.--Fig. 109 shows the details of a hand pump which is
easy to make. The barrel is a length of brass tubing; the plunger a piece
of  brass or preferably gun-metal rod, which fits the tube closely, but
works easily in it. The gland at the top of the barrel, E, is composed of a
piece, D, of the same tubing as the barrel, sliding in a collar, C,
soldered to E. The bottom of D and top of E are bevelled to force the
packing against the plunger. The plates A and B, soldered to D and C
respectively, are drawn together by three or more screws. A brass door-knob
makes a convenient top for the plunger. When the knob touches A, the bottom
of the plunger must not come lower than the top of the delivery pipe, lest
the water flow should be impeded and the valve, V, injured. Round off the
end of the plunger, so that it may be replaced easily and without
disarranging the packing if pulled out of the pump.

The valves are gun-metal balls, for which seats have been prepared by
hammering in steel cycle balls of the same size. Be careful to select balls
considerably larger than the bore of the pipes on which they rest, to avoid
all possibility of jamming. An eighth of an inch or so above the ball,
cross wires should be soldered in to prevent the ball rising too far from
its seat.

[Illustration: FIG. 110.]

A convenient mounting for a hand pump is shown in Fig. 110. The plate, F,
of the pump is screwed to a wooden base resting on a framework of bent
sheet zinc, which is attached to the bottom of a zinc water tray. The
delivery pipe, G, will be protected against undue strains if secured by a
strap to the side of the wooden base.

The same pump is easily adapted to be worked by a lever, which makes the
work of pumping easier. Fig. 111 gives details of the top of the plunger
and the links, B. A slot must be cut in the plunger for the lever, A, to
pass through, and the sides bored for a pivot pin. The links are straddled
(see sketch of end view) to prevent the back end of the lever wobbling from
side to side.

[Illustration: FIG. 111.--Details of lever for force pump.]

A Steam Pump.--The pump illustrated in Fig. 112 belongs to what is
probably the simplest self-contained type, as no fly wheel, crank, or
eccentric is needed for operating the valve.

The steam cylinder and the pump are set in line with one another (in the
case shown, horizontally), and half as far apart again as the stroke of the
cylinder. The plunger is either a continuation of the piston rod, or
attached to it.

[Illustration: FIG. 112--View of steam pump, showing details.]

An arm, S, fixed at right angles to the piston rod, has a forked end which
moves along the rod. This rod is connected with the slide valve through the
rocking arm, R1 and the rod, R2. On it are two adjustable stops, T1 T2,
which S strikes alternately towards the end of a stroke, causing the valve
to shift over and expose the other side of the piston to steam pressure.
The absence of the momentum of a fly wheel makes it necessary for the
thrust exerted by the piston to be considerably greater than the back
pressure of the water, so that the moving parts may work with a velocity
sufficient to open the valve. If the speed falls below a certain limit, the
valve opens only part way, the speed falls, and at the end of the next
stroke the valve is not shifted at all.

The diameter of the plunger must be decided by the pressure against which
it will have to work. For boiler feeding it should not exceed one-third
that of the piston; and in such case the piston rod and plunger may well be
one.

A piston valve, being moved more easily than a box valve, is better suited
for a pump of this kind, as friction should be reduced as much as possible.


CONSTRUCTION.

The cylinder will not be described in detail, as hints on making a
slide-valve cylinder have been given on earlier pages. The piston rod
should be three times as long as the stroke of the cylinder, if it is to
serve as pump plunger; and near the pump end an annular groove must be sunk
to take a packing.

The pump, if designed to work horizontally, will have the valves arranged
like the pump illustrated in Fig. 65; if vertically, like the pump shown in
Fig. 109. Both suction and delivery pipes should be of ample size, as the
pump works very fast. The pump is mounted on a foot, F, made by turning up
the ends of a piece of brass strip, and filing them to fit the barrel.

The bed can be fashioned out of stout sheet brass or zinc. Let it be of
ample size to start with, and do not cut it down until the pump is
complete. Rule a centre line for cylinder and pump, and mount the cylinder.
Pull out the piston rod plunger as far as it will go, and slip the pump
barrel on it. The foot of the pump must then be brought to the correct
height by filing and spreading the ends until the plunger works quite
easily in the pump, when this is pressed down firmly against the bed. When
adjustment is satisfactory, mark the position of the foot on the bed,
solder foot to barrel, and drill and tap the foot for the holding-down
screws. Don't forget that the distance between pump and cylinder gland must
be at least 1-1/3 times the stroke.

The valve motion can then be taken in hand. Cut off for the guides, G1 G2,
two pieces of stout brass strip, 2-1/2 inches long and 3/4 inch wide. Lay
them together in a vice, and bore the holes (Fig. 113) 1-1/4 inches apart,
centre to centre, for the 1/8-inch rods, R1 R2. The feet are then turned
over and a third hole bored in G1, midway between those previously made, to
take the end of the support, PP, of the rocking lever.

[Illustration: FIG. 113.--End view of striking mechanism of steam pump.]

Screw G1 G2 down to the bedplate, 3/4 inch away from the cylinder centre
line. G1 is abreast of the mouth of the pump, G2 about half an inch forward
of the end of the cylinder.

The striker, S, is a piece of brass strip soldered to 1/2 inch of tubing
fitting the piston rod. (See Fig. 113.) Its length is decided by running a
rod through the upper holes in G1 G2, allowance being made for the notch in
the end. The collar is tapped for two screws, which prevent S slipping on
the piston rod. The rods for R1 R2 are now provided with forks, made by
cutting and filing notches in bits of brass tubing. The notches should be
half as deep again as the rocking lever is wide, to give plenty of room for
movement. Solder the forks to the rods, and put the rods in place in the
guides, with the forks as far away from G1 as the travel of the slide
valve. Then measure to get the length of the rocking lever support. One end
of this should be filed or turned down to fit the hole drilled for it; the
other should be slotted to fit the lever accurately.

The rocking lever, RL, which should be of steel, is slotted at each end to
slide on the pins in the forks, and bored for the pivot pin, which, like
those in the forks, should be of hardened steel wire. Assemble the rocking
lever in its support and the rod forks, and solder on the support.

To the back end of R2 solder a steel plate, A, which must be bored for the
pin in the valve fork, after the correct position has been ascertained by
careful measurement.

The stops, T1 T2, are small, adjustable collars, kept tightly in place on
R1 by screws.

Setting the Striker.--Assemble all the parts. Pull out the piston rod as
far as it will go, and push the slide valve right back. Loosen the striker
and the forward stop, and slide them along in contact until the striker is
close to the pump. Tighten up their screws. Then push the piston rod fully
in, draw the valve rod fully out, and bring the rear stop up against the
striker, and make it fast. Each stop may now be moved 1/16 inch nearer to a
point halfway between them to cause "cushioning" of the piston, by
admitting steam before the stroke is quite finished.

A pump made by the author on this principle, having a 1-1/4 inch stroke and
a 1/2-inch bore, will deliver water at the rate of half a gallon per minute
against a head of a few feet.

Note.--To steady the flow and prevent "water hammer," a small air-chamber
should be attached to the delivery pipe.

An Alternative Arrangement.--If the reader prefers a steam pump which
will work at slow speeds, and be available, when not pumping, for driving
purposes, the design may be modified as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 114.
The striker becomes a cross head, and is connected by a forked rod passing
on each side of the pump with the crank of a fly wheel overhanging the
base. The valve is operated in the ordinary manner by an eccentric on the
crankshaft. The steadying effect of the fly wheel and the positive action
of the valve make it possible to use a larger pump plunger than is
advisable with the striking gear. With a pump piston of considerably
greater diameter than the piston rod, the pump may be made double-acting, a
gland being fitted at the front end for the piston rod to work through,
and, of course, a second set of valves added.

[Illustration: Fig. 114.--Plan of steam pump with fly wheel.]


A SUGGESTION.

For exhibition purposes a small, easily running, double-action pump might
be worked by the spindle of a gramophone. A crank of the proper throw and a
connecting rod must be provided. Both delivery pipes feed, through an
air-chamber, a fountain in the centre of a bowl, the water returning
through an overflow to the source of supply, so that the same water may be
used over and over again.



XXIII.   KITES.

Plain Rectangular Box Kites.--The plain box kite is easy to make and a
good flier. Readers should try their hands on it before attempting more
complicated models.

Lifting pressure is exerted only on the sides facing the wind, but the
other sides have their use in steadying the kite laterally, and in holding
in the wind, so that they justify their weight.

Proportions of Box.--Each box has wind faces one and a third times as
long as the sides, and the vertical depth of the box is about the same as
its fore and aft dimensions. That is, the ends of the boxes are square, and
the wind faces oblong, with one-third as much area again as the ends.
Little advantage is to be gained from making the boxes proportionately
deeper than this. The distance between the boxes should be about equal to
the depth of each box.


CONSTRUCTION.

After these general remarks, we may proceed to a practical description of
manufacture, which will apply to kites of all dimensions. It will be
prudent to begin on small models, as requiring small outlay.

Having decided on the size of your kite, cut out two pieces of material as
wide as a box is to be deep, and as long as the circumference of the box
plus an inch and a half to spare. Machine stitch 5/8 inch tapes along each
edge, using two rows of stitching about 1/8 inch from the edges of the
tape. Then double the piece over, tapes inside, and machine stitch the ends
together, three quarters of an inch from the edge. Note.--All thread ends
should be tied together to prevent unravelling, and ends of stitching
should be hand-sewn through the tape, as the greatest strain falls on these
points.

The most convenient shape for the rods is square, as fitting the corners
and taking tacks most easily. The sectional size of the rods is governed by
the dimensions of the kite, and to a certain extent by the number of
stretchers used. If four stretchers are employed in each box, two near the
top and two near the bottom, the rods need not be so stout as in a case
where only a single pair of central stretchers is preferred.

Lay the two boxes flat on the floor, in line with one another, and the
joins at the same end. Pass two rods through, and arrange the boxes so that
the outer edges are 1/2 inch from the ends of the rods. (These projections
protect the fabric when the kite strikes the ground).

Lay the rods on one corner, so that the sides make an angle of 45 degrees
with the floor, pull the boxes taut--be careful that they are square to
the rods--and drive three or four tacks through each end of the box into
the rods. Then turn them over and tack the other sides similarly. Repeat
the process with the other rods after measuring to get the distances
correct.

The length of the stretchers is found approximately by a simple
arithmetical sum, being the square root of the sum of the squares of the
lengths of two adjacent sides of the box. For example, if each box is 20 by
15 inches, the diagonal is the square root of  (20 squared plus 15 squared)
=  square root of 625 = 25 inches. The space occupied by the vertical rods
will about offset the stretch of the material, but to be on the safe side
and to allow for the notches, add another half-inch for small kites and
more proportionately for large ones. It is advisable to test one pair of
stretchers before cutting another, to reduce the effect of miscalculations.

The stretcher notches should be deep enough to grip the rods well and
prevent them twisting, and one must take care to have those on the same
stretcher exactly in line, otherwise one or other cannot possibly "bed"
properly. A square file is useful for shaping the notches.

Ordinarily stretchers do not tend to fall out, as the wind pressure puts
extra strain on them and keeps them up tight. But to prevent definitely any
movement one may insert screw eyes into the rods near the points at which
the stretchers press on them, and other eyes near the ends of the
stretchers to take string fastenings. These attachments will be found
useful for getting the first pair of stretchers into position, and for
preventing the stretchers getting lost when the kite is rolled up.

The bridle is attached to four eyes screwed into the rods near the tops of
the boxes. (See Fig. 118.) The top and bottom elements of the bridle must
be paired off to the correct length; the top being considerably shorter
than the bottom. All four parts may be attached to a brass ring, and all
should be taut when the ring is pulled on. The exact adjustment must be
found by experiment. In a very high wind it is advisable to shorten the top
of the bridle if you have any doubt as to the strength of your string, to
flatten the angle made by the kite with the wind.

[Illustration: FIG. 115.--Details of stretcher attachment for
diamond-shaped box kites.]

Diamond Box Kites.--In another type of box kite the boxes have four equal
sides, but the boxes are rhombus-shaped, as in Fig. 116, the long diagonal
being square to the wind, and the bridle attached at the front corner.

For particulars of design and construction I am much indebted to Mr. W. H.
Dines,  F.R.S., who has used the diamond box kite for his meteorological
experiments to carry registering meteorographs several thousands of feet
into the air.

The longitudinal sticks used at the corners have the section shown in Fig.
115. They are about four times as wide at the front edge, which presses
against the fabric, as at the back, and their depth is about twice the
greater width. This shape makes it easy to attach the shorter stretchers,
which have their ends notched and bound to prevent splitting.

[Illustration: FIG. 116.--Plan of diamond box kite, showing arrangement
of stretchers.]

Fig. 117 is a perspective diagram of a kite. The sail of each box measures
from top to bottom one-sixth the total circumference of the box, or, to
express the matter differently, each face of the box is half as long again
as its depth. The distance separating the boxes is equal to the depth of a
box.

The sides of a box make angles of 60 degrees and 120 degrees with one
another, the depth of the space enclosed from front to back being the same
as the length of a side. With these angles the effective area of the sails
is about six-sevenths of the total area. Therefore a kite of the dimensions
given in Fig. 117 will have an effective area of some thirty square feet.

[Illustration: FIG. 117.--Diamond box kite in perspective. Ties are
indicated by fine dotted lines.]

The long stretchers pass through holes in the fabric close to the sticks,
and are connected with the sticks by stout twine. Between stretcher and
stick is interposed a wedge-shaped piece of wood (A in Fig. 115), which
prevents the stick being drawn out of line. This method of attachment
enables the boxes to be kept tight should the fabric stretch at all--as
generally happens after some use; also it does away with the necessity for
calculating the length of the stretchers exactly.

The stretchers are tied together at the crossing points to give support to
the longer of the pair.

The dotted lines AB, AC, AD, EM, and EN in Fig. 117 indicate ties made with
wire or doubled and hemmed strips of the fabric used for the wings. AB,
running from the top of the front stick to the bottom of the back stick,
should be of such a length that, when the kite is stood on a level surface,
the front and back sticks make right angles with that surface, being two
sides of a rectangle whereof the other two sides are imaginary lines
joining the tops and bottoms of the sticks. This tie prevents the back of
the kite drooping under pressure of the wind, and increases the angle of
flight. The other four ties prevent the back sails turning over at the
edges and spilling the wind, and also keep them flatter. This method of
support should be applied to the type of kite described in the first
section of this chapter.

String Attachment.--A box kite will fly very well if the string is
attached to the top box only. The tail box is then free to tilt up and trim
the kite to varying pressures independently of the ascent of the kite as a
whole. When the bottom box also is connected to the string it is a somewhat
risky business sending a kite up in a high wind, as in the earlier part of
the ascent the kite is held by the double bridle fairly square to the wind.
If any doubt is entertained as to the ability of the string to stand the
pressure, the one-box attachment is preferable, though possibly it does not
send the kite to as great a height as might be attained under similar
conditions by the two-box bridle.

[Illustration: FIG. 118.--Box kite with rear wings.]

When one has to attach a string or wire to a large kite at a single point,
the ordinary method of using an eye screwed into the front stick is
attended by obvious risks. Mr. Dines employs for his kites (which measure
up to nine feet in height) an attachment which is independent of the front
stick. Two sticks, equal in length to the width of the sail, are tacked on
to the inner side of the sail close to the front stick. Rings are secured
to the middle of the sticks and connected by a loop of cord, to which the
wire (in this case) used for flying the kite is made fast.

A Box Kite with Wings.--The type of kite shown in Fig. 118 is an
excellent flyer, very easy, to make and very portable. The two boxes give
good longitudinal stability, the sides of the boxes prevent quick lateral
movements, and the two wings projecting backwards from the rear corners
afford the "dihedral angle" effect which tends to keep the kite steadily
facing the wind. The "lift," or vertical upward pull, obtained with the
type is high, and this, combined with its steadiness, makes the kite useful
for aerial photography, and, on a much larger scale, for man-lifting.

The materials required for the comparatively small example with which the
reader may content himself in the first instance are:

8 wooden rods or bamboos, 4 feet long and 1/2 inch in diameter. 4 yards of
lawn or other light, strong material, 30 inches wide. 12 yards of
unbleached tape, 5/8 inch wide. 8 brass rings, 1 inch diameter.

The Boxes.--Cut off 2 yards 8 inches of material quite squarely, fold
down the middle, crease, and cut along the crease. This gives two pieces 80
by 15 inches.

Double-stitch tape along the edges of each piece.

Lay the ends of a piece together, tapes inside, and stitch them together
half an inch from the edge. Bring a rod up against the stitching on the
inside, and calculate where to run a second row of stitching parallel to
the first, to form a pocket into which the rod will slip easily but not
loosely. (See Fig. 119, a.)

Remove the rod and stitch the row.

Now repeat the process at the other end of the folded piece. The positions
of the other two rod pockets must be found by measuring off 15 inches from
the inner stitching of those already made. (Be careful to measure in the
right direction in each case, so that the short and long sides of the box
shall be opposite.) Fold the material beyond the 15-inch lines to allow for
the pockets and the 1/2-inch "spare," and make the two rows of stitching.

[Illustration: FIG. 119.--Plan of box kite with rear wings.]

Repeat these operations with the second strip of material, and you will
have prepared your two boxes, each measuring, inside the pockets, 15 by
about 20 inches. (See Fig. 119.) Now cut out the wings in accordance with
the dimensions given in Fig. 120. Each is 47-1/2 inches long and 15 inches
across at the broadest point. It is advisable to cut a pattern out of brown
paper, and to mark off the material from this, so arranging the pattern
that the long 47-1/2-inch side lies on a selvedge. [The edge of a fabric
that is woven so that it will not fray or ravel.]

[Illustration: FIG. 120.--Wing for box kite.]

Double stitch tapes along the three shorter sides of each wing, finishing
off the threads carefully. Then sew the wings to what will be the back
corners of the boxes when the kite is in the air--to the "spares" outside
the rod pockets of a long side.

Take your needle and some strong thread, and make all corners at the ends
of pockets quite secure. This will prevent troublesome splitting when the
kite is pulling hard.

Sew a brass ring to each of the four wing angles, AA, BB, at the back, and
as many on the front of the spares of the rod pockets diagonally opposite
to those to which the wings are attached, halfway up the boxes. These rings
are to take the two stretchers in each box.

Slip four rods, after rounding off their ends slightly, through the pockets
of both boxes, and secure them by sewing the ends of the pockets and by the
insertion of a few small tacks. These rods will not need to be removed.

The cutting and arrangement of the stretchers and the holes for the same
require some thought. Each stretcher lies behind its wing, passes in front
of the rod nearest to it, and behind that at the corner diagonally
opposite. (See Fig. 119.) The slits through which it is thrust should be
strengthened with patches to prevent ripping of the material.

Two persons should hold a box out as squarely as possible while a stretcher
is measured. Cut a nick 3/8 inch deep in one end of the stretcher, and pass
the end through the fabric slits to the ring not on the wing. Pull the wing
out, holding it by its ring, and cut the stretcher off 1 inch from the
nearest point of the ring. The extra length will allow for the second nick
and the tensioning of the material. Now measure off the second stretcher by
the first, nick it, and place it in position. If the tension seems
excessive, shorten the rods slightly, but do not forget that the fabric
will stretch somewhat in use.

[Illustration: FIG. 121.--Box kite with front and back wings.]

Make the stretchers for the second box, and place them in position. The
wings ought to be pretty taut if the adjustments are correct, but should
they show a tendency to looseness, a third pair of stretchers of light
bamboo may be inserted between the other two, being held up to the rods by
loops of tape. In order to be able to take up any slackness, the wing end
of each stretcher may be allowed to project a couple of inches, and be
attached by string to the near ring, as described on p. 271. The bridle to
which the flying string is attached is made up of four parts, two long, two
short, paired exactly as regards length. These are attached to eyes screwed
into the front rods three inches below the tops of the boxes. Adjustment is
made very easy if a small slider is used at the kite end of each part.
These sliders should be of bone or some tough wood, and measure 1 inch by
3/8 inch. The forward ends of the bridle are attached to a brass ring from
which runs the flying string.

It is advisable to bind the stretchers with strong thread just behind the
notches to prevent splitting, and to loosen the stretchers when the kite is
not in use, to allow the fabric to retain as much as possible of its
elasticity.

The area of the kite affected by wind is about 14 square feet; the total
weight, 1-1/2 lb. The cost of material is about 2s.

The experience gained from making the kite described may be used in the
construction of a larger kite, six or more feet high, with boxes 30 by 22
by 22 inches, and wings 24 inches wide at the broadest point. If a big lift
is required, or it is desired to have a kite usable in very light breezes,
a second pair of wings slightly narrower than those at the back may be
attached permanently to the front of the boxes, or be fitted with hooks and
eyes for use on occasion only. (Fig. 121.) In the second case two sets of
stretchers will be needed.

[Illustration: FIG. 122.--Simple string winder for kite.]

Note.--If all free edges of boxes and wings are cut on the curve, they
will be less likely to turn over and flap in the wind; but as the curvature
gives extra trouble in cutting out and stitching, the illustrations have
been drawn to represent a straight-edged kite.

Kite Winders.--The plain stick which small children flying small kites on
short strings find sufficient for winding their twine on is far too
primitive a contrivance for dealing with some hundreds of yards, may be, of
string. In such circumstances one needs a quick-winding apparatus. A very
fairly effective form of winder, suitable for small pulls, is illustrated
in Fig. 122.

Select a sound piece of wood, 3/8-inch thick, 5 inches wide, and about 1
foot long. In each end cut a deep V, the sides of which must be carefully
smoothed and rounded with chisel and sandpaper. Nail a wooden rod, 15
inches long and slightly flattened where it makes contact, across the
centre of the board, taking care not to split the rod, and clinch the ends
of the nails securely. The projecting ends of the rods are held in the
hands while the string runs out. The projecting piece, A, which must also
be well secured, is for winding in. The winding hand must be held somewhat
obliquely to the board to clear the spindle. Winding is much less irksome
if a piece of tubing is interposed between the spindle and the other hand,
which can then maintain a firm grip without exercising a braking effect.

This kind of winder is unsuited for reeling in a string on which there is a
heavy pull, as the hands are working at a great disadvantage at certain
points of a revolution.

[Illustration: FIG. 123.--Plan of string-winding drum, frame, and brake.]

A far better type is shown in Figs. 123 and 124. Select a canister at least
6 inches in diameter, and not more than 6 inches long, with an overlapping
lid. Get a turner to make for you a couple of wooden discs, 3/8 inch thick,
and having a diameter 2 inches greater than that of the tin. Holes at least
3/8 inch across should be bored in the centre of each. Cut holes 1 inch
across in the centre of the lid and the bottom of the canister, and nail
the lid concentrically to one disc, the canister itself to the other. Then
push the lid on the tin and solder them together. This gives you a large
reel. For the spindle you will require a piece of brass tubing or steel bar
1 foot long and large enough to make a hard driving fit with the holes in
the wood. Before driving it in, make a framework of 3/4-inch strip iron
(Fig. 123), 3/32 or 1/8 inch thick, for the reel to turn in. The width of
this framework is 1 inch greater than the length of the reel; its length is
twice the diameter of the canister. Rivet or solder the ends together.
Halfway along the sides bore holes to fit the spindle.

Make a mark 1 inch from one end of the spindle, a second l/8 inch farther
away from the first than the length of the reel. Drill 3/16-inch holes at
the marks. Select two wire nails which fit the holes, and remove their
heads. Next cut two 1/4-inch pieces off a tube which fits the spindle. The
reel, spindle, and framework are now assembled as follows:

[Illustration: FIG. 124.--End view of string winder, showing brake and
lever.]

Push the end of the spindle which has a hole nearest to it through one of
the framework holes, slip on one of the pieces of tubing, drive the spindle
through the reel until half an inch projects; put on the second piece of
tubing, and continue driving the spindle till the hole bored in it shows.
Then push the nails half-way through the holes in the spindle, and fix
them to the ends of the reel by small staples. A crank is made out of
1/2-inch wood (oak by preference) bored to fit the spindle, to which it
must be pinned. A small wooden handle is attached at a suitable distance
away. If there is any fear of the wood splitting near the spindle, it
should be bound with fine wire. An alternative method is to file the end of
the spindle square, and to solder to it a piece of iron strip in which a
square hole has been made to fit the spindle. The crank should be as light
as is consistent with sufficient strength, and be balanced so that there
shall not be unpleasant vibration when the string runs out fast, and of
course it must be attached very securely to the spindle.

What will be the front of the framework must be rounded off on the top
edge, which has a wire guide running parallel to it (Fig. 123) to direct
the string on to the reel; and into the back are riveted a couple of eyes,
to which are attached the ends of a cord passing round the body, or some
stationary object.

[Illustration: FIG. 125.--String winder in operation.]

A pin should be provided to push into a hole at one end of the reel and
lock the reel by striking the framework, and it will be found a great
convenience to have a brake for controlling the reel when the kite is
rising. Such a brake is easily fitted to the side of the frame, to act on
the left end of the reel when a lever is depressed by the fingers. There
should be a spring to keep it off the reel when it is not required. The
diagrams show where the brake and brake lever are situated.

Note.--To obtain great elevations a fine wire (piano wire 1/32 inch in
diameter) is generally used, but to protect the user against electric
shocks the wire must be connected with an "earthed" terminal, on the
principle of the lightning conductor.



XXIV.   PAPER GLIDERS.

In this chapter are brought to your notice some patterns of paper gliders
which, if made and handled carefully, prove very satisfactory. Gliders are
sensitive and "moody" things, so that first experiments may be attended by
failure; but a little persistence will bring its reward, and at the end of
a few hours you will, unless very unlucky, be the possessor of a good
specimen or two.

The three distinguishing features of a good glider are stability,
straightness of flight, and a small gliding angle. If the last is as low as
1 in 10, so that the model falls but 1 foot vertically while progressing 10
feet horizontally, the glider is one to be proud of.

Materials.--The materials needed for the gliders to be described are
moderately stout paper--cream-laid notepaper is somewhat heavy for the
purpose--and a little sealing wax or thin sheet metal for weighting.

[Illustration: FIG. 126.--Paper glider: Model "A."]

[Illustration: FIG. 127.--How to launch Model "A."]

Model "A."--Double a piece of paper 8 inches long and 2-1/2 inches wide,
and cut out, through both folds, the shape shown in Fig. 126. Flatten the
piece and fold the "head" inwards four times on the side away from the
direction in which the paper was folded before being cut out. Flatten the
folds and fix to the centre a little clip formed by doubling a piece of
thin metal 3/16 by 1/2 inch. Make certain that the wings are quite flat,
and then, holding the glider between thumb and first finger, as shown in
Fig. 127, push it off gently. If the balance is right, it will fly quite a
long way with an undulating motion. If too heavy in front, it will dive; if
too light, it will rise suddenly and slip backwards to the ground. The clip
or the amount of paper in the head must be modified accordingly. This type
is extraordinarily efficient if the dimensions, weighting, and shape are
correct, and one of the easiest possible to make.

Model "B."--The next model (Fig. 128), suggesting by its shape the
Langley steam-driven aeroplane, has two sets of wings tandem. Double a
piece of paper and cut out of both folds simultaneously a figure of the
shape indicated by the solid lines in the diagram. The portion A is square,
and forms the head weight; B indicates the front planes, C the rear planes.
Bend the upper fold of each pair into the positions B1, C1, marked by
dotted lines. Their front edges make less than a right angle with the keel,
to ensure the wings slanting slightly upwards towards the front when
expanded.

The model is now turned over, and the other wings are folded exactly on top
of their respective fellows. Then the halves of the head are folded twice
inwards, to bring the paper into as compact a form as possible. It remains
to open out the wings at right angles to the keel, and then raise their
tips slightly so that the two planes of a pair shall make what is called a
"dihedral" angle with one another.

[Illustration: FIG. 128.--Details of paper gliders: Model "B" above,
Model "C" below.]

Before launching, look at your model endways and make sure that the rear
planes are exactly in line with those in front. It is essential that they
should be so for straight flight. Then grip the keel at its centre between
finger and thumb and launch gently. Mark how your glider behaves. If it
plunges persistently, trim off a very little of the head. If, on the
contrary, it settles almost vertically, weight must be added in front. The
position of the weight is soon found by sliding a metal clip along the keel
until a good result is obtained.

Note that if the leading edges of the front wings are bent slightly
downwards the glider may fly much better than before.

A good specimen of this type is so stable that if launched upside down it
will right itself immediately and make a normal flight.

Model "C."--This is cut out of doubled paper according to the solid lines
of Fig. 128. The three sets of planes are bent back in the manner already
described, but the front planes are given a somewhat steeper angle than the
others. This type is very stable and very fairly efficient.

General Remarks.--Always pick up a glider by the keel or middle, not by
one of the wings, as a very little distortion will give trouble.

The merits of a glider depend on length, and on straightness of flight; so
in competition the launching height should be limited by a string stretched
across the room, say 6 feet above the floor. If the room be too short for a
glider to finish its flight, the elevation at which it strikes the wall is
the measure of its efficiency.

Out-of-door flights are impracticable with these very frail models when
there is the slightest breeze blowing. On a perfectly calm day, however,
much better fun can be got out of doors than in, owing to the greater space
available. A good glider launched from a second-floor window facing a
large lawn should travel many yards before coming to grass.

Large gliders of the types detailed above can be made of very stout paper
stiffened with slips of cane or bamboo; but the time they demand in
construction might perhaps be more profitably spent on a power-driven
aeroplane such as forms the subject of the next chapter.



XXV.  A SELF-LAUNCHING MODEL AEROPLANE.
By V. E. Johnson, M.A.

This article deals not with a scale model--a small copy of some
full-sized machine--but with one designed for actual flight; with one not
specially intended to create records either of length or duration, but
which, although small details must perforce be omitted, does along its main
lines approximate to the "real thing."

Partly for this reason, and partly because it proves a far more interesting
machine, we choose a model able to rise from the ground under its own power
and make a good flight after rising, assuming the instructions which we
give to have been carefully carried out. It is perhaps hardly necessary to
add that such a machine can always be launched by hand when desired.

Before entering into special details we may note some broad principles
which must be taken into account if success is to attend our efforts.

Important Points.--It is absolutely essential that the weight be kept
down as much as possible. It is quite a mistake to suppose that weight
necessarily means strength. On the contrary, it may actually be a cause of
weakness if employed in the wrong place and in the wrong way. The heavier
the machine, the more serious the damage done in the event of a bad
landing. One of the best and easiest ways of ensuring lightness is to let
the model be of very simple construction. Such a model is easier to build
and more efficient when constructed than one of more complicated design.
Weigh every part of your model as you construct it, and do not be content
until all symmetrically arranged parts which should weigh the same not only
look alike but do actually balance one another. (Note.--The writer always
works out the various parts of his models in grammes, not ounces.) If a
sufficiently strong propeller bearing weighing only half a gramme can be
employed, so much the better, as you have more margin left for some other
part of the model in which it would be inadvisable to cut down the weight
to a very fine limit.


Details.--To pass now to details, we have four distinct parts to deal
with:--

1. The framework, or fuselage.

2. The supporting surfaces, consisting of the main plane, or aerofoil,
behind, and the elevator in front.

3. The propellers.

4. The motor, in this case two long skeins of rubber; long, because we wish
to be able to give our motor many turns, from 700 to, say, 1,000 as a
limit, so that the duration of flight may be considerable.

[Illustration: FIG. 129.-Sections of backbone for model aeroplane.]


The Backbone.--For the backbone or central rod take a piece of pitch pine
or satin walnut 52 inches long, 5/8 inch deep, and 1/2 inch broad, and
plane it down carefully until it has a T-shaped section, as shown in Fig.
129, and the thickness is not anywhere more than 1/8 inch. It is quite
possible to reduce the thickness to even 1/16 inch and still have a
sufficient reserve of strength to withstand the pull of 28 strands of
1/16-inch rubber wound up 1,000 times; but such a course is not advisable
unless you are a skilful planer and have had some experience in
model-making.


If you find the construction of the T-shaped rod too difficult, two
courses are open--

(l) To get a carpenter to do the job for you, or

(2) To give the rod the triangular section shown in Fig. 129, each side of
the equilateral triangle being half an inch long.

[Illustration: FIG. 150--Side elevation of model aeroplane.]


The top of the T or the base of the triangle, as the case may be, is used
uppermost. This rod must be pierced in three places for the vertical masts
employed in the bracing of the rod, trussing the main plane, and adjusting
the elevator. These are spaced out in Fig. 130, which shows a side
elevation of the model. Their sectional dimensions are 1/16 by 1/4 inch;
their respective lengths are given in Fig. 130. Round the front edges and
sharpen the rear.

In Fig. 130 is shown the correct attitude or standing pose necessary to
make the model rise quickly and sweep boldly up into the air without
skimming the ground for some 10 to 20 yards as so many models do. E is the
elevator (7 by 3 inches); A the main plane (5-1/2 by 29 inches); W the
wheels; and RS the rear skid, terminating in a piece of hooked steel wire.
The vertical bracing of these masts is indicated. The best material to use
for the purpose is Japanese silk gut, which is very light and strong. To
brace, drill a small, neat hole in the mast and rod where necessary, pass
through, and tie. Do the same with each one.

To return to the central mast, which must also form the chassis. This is
double and opened out beneath as shown in Fig. 131,  yz being a piece
similar to the sides, which completes, the triangle x y z and gives the
necessary rigidity. Attach this piece by first binding to its extremities
two strips of aluminium, or by preference very thin tinned iron, Tl and T2.
Bend to shape and bind to xy, xz as shown in Fig. 131.

[Illustration: FIG. 131.--Front elevation of chassis.]

[Illustration: FIG. l32.-Wheel for model aeroplane chassis.]

[Illustration: FIG. 133.--Plan of model aeroplane.]

The Wheels and Chassis.--WW are the two wheels on which the model runs.
They are made of hollow brass curtain rings, 1 inch in diameter, such as
can be bought at four a penny. For spokes, solder two strips of thin tinned
iron to the rings, using as little solder as possible. (Fig. 132.) To
connect these wheels with the chassis, first bind to the lower ends of xy,
xz two strips of thin tinned iron, T3 and T4, after drilling in them two
holes of sufficient size to allow a piece of steel wire of "bonnet pin"
gauge to pass freely, but not loosely, through them. Soften the wire by
making it red hot and allowing it to cool slowly, and solder one end of
this wire (which must be quite straight and 5-1/4 inches long) to the
centre of the cross pieces or spokes of one wheel. Pass the axle through
the holes in the ends of xy, xz, and solder on the other wheel. Your
chassis is then finished.

The rear skid (RS in Fig. 130) is attached to the central rod by gluing,
and drilling a hole through both parts and inserting a wooden peg; or the
upright may be mortised in. On no account use nail, tack, or screw. Attach
the vertical masts and the horizontal ones about to be described by gluing
and binding lightly with thread, or by neatly glued strips of the Hart's
fabric used for the planes.

Horizontal Spars, etc.--To consider now the horizontal section or part
plan of the model, from which, to avoid confusion, details of most vertical
parts are omitted. Referring to Fig. 133, it will be seen that we have
three horizontal masts or spars--HS1, 4 inches; HS2, 6 inches; and HS3,
slightly over 12 inches long. The last is well steamed, slightly curved and
left to dry while confined in such a manner as to conform to the required
shape. It should so remain at least twenty-four hours before being fixed to
the model. All the spars are attached by glue and neat cross bindings. If
the central rod be of triangular instead of T section, the join can be made
more neatly. The same remarks apply to the two 9 and 10 inch struts at the
propeller end of the rod, which have to withstand the pull of the rubber
motor on PPl. These two pieces will have a maximum strength and minimum
weight if of the T section used for the rod. If the work is done carefully,
1/4 inch each way will be sufficient.

Main Plane and Elevator.--The framework of each plane is simply four
strips of satin walnut or other suitable wood, 1/4 inch broad and 1/16 inch
or even less in thickness for the main plane, and about 1/16 by 1/16 inch
for the elevator. These strips are first glued together at the corners and
left to set. The fabric (Hart's fabric or some similar very light material)
is then glued on fairly tight--that is, just sufficiently so to get rid of
all creases. The main plane is then fixed flat on to the top of the central
rod by gluing and cross binding at G and H. (A better but rather more
difficult plan is to fasten the rectangular frame on first and then apply
the fabric.) The same course is followed in dealing with the elevator,
which is fixed, however, not to the rod, but to the 4-inch horizontal spar,
HS1, just behind it, in such a manner as to have a slight hinge movement at
the back. This operation presents no difficulty, and may be effected in a
variety of ways. To set the elevator, use is made of the short vertical
mast, M1. A small hole is pierced in the front side of the elevator frame
at Z, and through this a piece of thin, soft iron wire is pushed, bent
round the spar, and tied. The other end of the wire is taken forward and
wrapped three or four times round the mast M1, which should have several
notches in its front edge, to assist the setting of the elevator at
different angles. Pull the wire tight, so that the elevator shall maintain
a constant angle when once set. H H1 is a piece of 25 to 30 gauge wire bent
as shown and fastened by binding. It passes round the front of the rod, in
which a little notch should be cut, so as to be able to resist the pull of
the twin rubber motors, the two skeins of which are stretched between H H1
and the hooks formed on the propeller spindles. If all these hooks are
covered with cycle valve tubing the rubber will last much longer. The
rubber skeins pass through two little light wire rings fastened to the
underside ends of HS2. (Fig. 133.)

The front skid or protector, FS, is made out of a piece of thin, round,
jointless cane, some 9 inches in length, bent round as shown in Fig. 134,
in which A B represents the front piece of the T-shaped rod and x y z a the
cane skid; the portion x y passing on the near side of the vertical part of
the T, and z a on the far side of the same. At E and F thread is bound
right round the rod. Should the nose of the machine strike the ground, the
loop of cane will be driven along the underside of the rod and the shock be
minimized. So adjust matters that the skid slides fairly stiff. Note that
the whole of the cane is on the under side of the top bar of the T.

[Illustration: FIG. 134.--Front skid and attachment to backbone.]

Bearings.--We have still to deal with the propellers and their bearings.
The last, TN and TNl (Fig. 133), are simply two tiny pieces of tin about
half a gramme in weight, bent round the propeller spar HS3 at B and B1.
Take a strip of thin tin 1/4 inch wide and of sufficient length to go
completely round the spar (which is 1/4 by 1/8 inch) and overlap slightly.
Solder the ends together, using a minimum amount of solder. Now bore two
small holes through wood and tin from rear to front, being careful to go
through the centre. The hole must be just large enough to allow the
propeller axle to run freely, but not loosely, in it. Primitive though such
a bearing may seem, it answers admirably in practice. The wood drills out
or is soon worn more than the iron, and the axle runs quite freely. The
pull of the motor is thus directed through the thin curved spar at a point
where the resistance is greatest--a very important matter in model
aeroplane construction. To strengthen this spar further against torsional
forces, run gut ties from B and Bl down to the bottom of the rear vertical
skid post; and from B to B1 also pass a piece of very thin piano wire,
soldered to the tin strips over a little wooden bridge, Q, like a violin
bridge, on the top of the central rod, to keep it quite taut.

[Illustration: FIG. 135--"Centrale" wooden propeller.]

Propellers.--To turn now to the propellers. Unless the reader has already
had fair experience in making model propellers, he should purchase a
couple, one right-handed and one left-handed, as they have to revolve in
opposite directions. It would be quite impossible to give in the compass of
this article such directions as would enable a novice to make a really
efficient propeller, and it must be efficient for even a decent flight with
a self-launching model. The diameter of the two propellers should be about
11-1/2 to 11-3/4 inches, with a pitch angle at the extremities of about 25
to 30 degrees as a limit. The "centrale" type (Fig. 135) is to be
preferred. Such propellers can be procured at Messrs. A. W. Gamage, Ltd.,
Holborn, E.C.; Messrs. T. W. K. Clarke and Co., Kingston-on-Thames; and
elsewhere.

For the particular machine which we are considering, the total weight of
the two propellers, including axle and hook for holding the rubber, should
not exceed 3/4 oz. This means considerable labour in cutting and
sandpapering away part of the boss, which is always made much too large in
propellers of this size. It is wonderful what can be done by care and
patience. The writer has in more than one case reduced the weight of a
propeller by more than one-half by such means, and has yet left sufficient
strength.

The combined axle and hook should be made as follows:--Take a piece of thin
steel wire, sharpen one end, and bend it as shown at C (Fig. 136). Pass the
end B through a tight-fitting hole in the centre of the small boss of the
propeller, and drive C into the wood. Solder a tiny piece of 1/8-inch brass
tubing to the wire axle at A, close up to the rubber hook side of the
propeller, and file quite smooth. The only things now left to do are to
bend the wire into the form of a hook (as shown by the dotted line), and to
cover this hook, as already advised, with a piece of valve tubing to
prevent fraying the rubber skeins.

[Illustration: FIG. 136.--Axle and hook for propeller.]

Weight.--The weight of a model with a T-shaped central rod 1/16 inch
thick should be 4-1/2 oz. Probably it will be more than this--as a maximum
let us fix 6 oz.--although 4-1/2 oz. is quite possible, as the writer has
proved in actual practice. In any case the centre of gravity of the machine
without the rubber motor should be situated 1 inch behind the front or
entering edge of the main plane. When the rubber motor (14 strands of
1/16-inch rubber for each propeller, total weight 2 oz.) is in position,
the centre of gravity will be further forward, in front of the main plane.
The amount of rubber mentioned is for a total weight of 6-1/2 oz. If the
weight of the model alone be 6 oz., you will probably have to use 16
strands, which again adds to the weight, and makes one travel in a vicious
circle. Therefore I lay emphasis on the advice, Keep down the weight.

The front edge of the elevator should be set about 3/8 inch higher than the
back, and the model be tried first as a glider, with the rubber and
propellers in position. If it glides satisfactorily, wind up the motor, say
500 turns, and launch by hand. When a good flight has been obtained, and
the correct angle of the elevator has been determined, place the model on a
strip of linoleum, wind up, and release the propellers. The model should
rise in its own length and remain in the air (if wound up 900 turns) at
least three quarters of a minute. Choose a calm day if possible. If a wind
blows, let the model face the breeze. Remember that the model flies high,
and select a wide open space. Do not push the model forward; just release
the propellers, held one in each hand near the boss by the fingers and
thumb. As a lubricant for the rubber use pure glycerine. It is advisable to
employ a geared-up mechanical winder, since to make 1,800 turns with the
fingers is rather fatiguing and very tedious.

Simple as this model may seem in design, one built by the writer on exactly
the lines given has met the most famous flying models of the day in open
competition and proved successful against them.



XXVI. APPARATUS FOR SIMPLE SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS.

Colour Discs for the Gramophone.--The gramophone, by virtue of its table
revolving at a controllable speed, comes in useful for a series of optical
experiments made with coloured discs bearing designs of different kinds.

The material needed for these discs is cardboard, covered with white paper
on one side, or the Bristol board used by artists. The discs on which the
designs are drawn should be made as large as the gramophone table will take
conveniently, so as to be viewed by a number of people at once. To
encourage readers who do not possess a gramophone, it may be pointed out
that a gramophone, is merely a convenience, and not indispensable for
turning the discs, which may be revolved on a sharpened pencil or any other
spindle with pointed ends.

The Vanishing Spirals (Fig. 137).--This design, if spun slowly in a
clockwise direction, gives one the impression that the lines all move in
towards the centre. If the disc is turned in an anti-clockwise direction,
the lines seem to move towards the circumference and disappear. To get the
proper effect the gaze should be fixed and not attempt to follow the lines
round.

[Illustration: FIG. 137.]

[Illustration: FIG. 138.]

The Rolling Circles.--Figs. 138 and 139 are variations of the same idea.
In Fig. 138 two large circles are described cutting one another and
enclosing a smaller circle concentric with the disc. When spun at a certain
rate the larger circles will appear to run independently round the small.
The effect is heightened if the circles are given different colours. If
black only is used for the large circles, the eyes should be kept half
closed. In Fig. 139 two pairs of circles are described about two centres,
neither of which is the centre of the disc. The pairs appear to roll
independently.

[Illustration: FIG. 139.]

[Illustration: FIG. 140.]

The Wriggling Line (Fig. 140).--If this design is revolved at a low speed
and the eye is fixed on a point, the white (or coloured) line will seem to
undulate in a very extraordinary manner. The line is made up of arcs of
circles, and as the marking out is somewhat of a geometrical problem, a
diagram (Fig. 141) is added to show how it is done. The dotted curves are
those parts of the circles which do not enter into the design.

Begin by marking out the big circle A for the disc. The circumference of
this is divided into six equal parts (chord equal to radius), and through
the points of division are drawn the six lines from the centre. Describe
circles aaa, each half the diameter of A. The circles bbb are then drawn
from centres on the lines RRR, and with the same radius as aaa., The same
centres are used for describing the circles a1 a1 a1 and b1 b1 b1, parts of
which form the inner boundary of the line. The background should be
blackened and the belt left white or be painted some bright colour.

[Illustration: FIG. 141.]

Another optical illusion is afforded by Fig. 142. Two sets of circles are
described about different centres, and the crescent-shaped areas between
them coloured, the remainder of the disc being left white. The disc is
revolved about the centre of the white areas, and one gets the impression
that the coloured parts are portions of separate discs separated by white
discs.

[Illustration: FIG. 142.]

[Illustration: FIG. 143.]

The Magic Spokes (Fig. 143).--Place a design like this on the gramophone
and let it turn at high speed. The radial lines seem but a blur. Now punch
a hole one-eighth of an inch in diameter in a piece of blackened card, and,
standing well away from the gramophone, apply your eye to the hole and move
the card quickly to and fro. The extreme briefness of the glimpses obtained
of the moving lines seems to rob them of motion, or even make them appear
to be moving in the direction contrary to the actual. Instead of a single
hole, one may use a number of holes punched at equal intervals round a
circle, and revolve the card on the centre. If a certain speed be
maintained, the spokes will appear motionless.

The substitution of a long narrow slit for a circular hole gives other
effects.

[Illustration: FIG. 144.]

A Colour Top.--Cut a 4-inch disc out of white cardboard and blacken
one-half with Indian ink. On the other half draw four series of concentric
black lines, as shown in Fig. 144. If the disc is mounted on a knitting
needle and spun in a horizontal plane, the black lines will appear of
different colours. A clockwise rotation makes the outermost lines appear a
greenish blue, those nearest the centre a dark red, and the intermediate
groups yellow and green. A reversal of the motion reverses the order of the
colours, the red lines now being farthest from the centre. The experiment
is generally most successful by artificial light, which contains a larger
proportion of red and yellow rays than does sunlight. The speed at which
the top revolves affects the result considerably. It should be kept
moderate, any excess tending to neutralize the colours.

[Illustration: FIG. 145.]

The Magic Windmill.--Mark a circle 2-1/2 inches in diameter on a piece of
notepaper, resting the centre leg [of the compass] so lightly that it dents
without piercing the paper. With the same centre describe a 3/4-inch
circle. Join the circles by eight equally spaced radial lines, and an
eighth of an inch away draw dotted parallel lines, all on the same side of
their fellow lines in order of rotation. Cut out along the large circle,
and then with a. sharp knife follow the lines shown double in Fig. 145.
This gives eight little vanes, each of which must be bent upwards to
approximately the same angle round a flat ruler held with an edge on the
dotted line. Next make a dent with a lead pencil at the exact centre on the
vane side, and revolve the pencil until the dent is well polished.

[Illustration: FIG. 146.]

Hold a pin, point upwards, in the right hand, and with the left centre the
mill, vanes pointing downwards, on the pin (Fig. 146). The mill will
immediately commence to revolve at a steady pace, and will continue to do
so indefinitely; though, if the head of the pin be stuck in, say, a piece
of bread, no motion will occur. The secret is that the heat of the hand
causes a very slight upward current of warmed air, which is sufficient to
make the very delicately poised windmill revolve.

A Pneumatic Puzzle.--For the very simple apparatus illustrated by Fig.
147 one needs only half a cotton reel, three pins, and a piece of glass or
metal tubing which fits the hole in the reel. Adjust a halfpenny centrally
over the hole and stick the pins into the reel at three equidistant points,
so that they do not quite touch the coin, and with their ends sloping
slightly outwards to allow the halfpenny to fall away.

[Illustration: FIG. 147.--Apparatus for illustrating an apparent
scientific paradox.]

Press the coin against the reel and blow hard through the tube. One would
expect the coin to fall; but, on the contrary, the harder you blow the
tighter will it stick, even if the reel be pointed downwards. Only when you
stop blowing will it fall to the floor.

This is a very interesting experiment, and will mystify onlookers who do
not understand the reason for the apparent paradox, which is this. The air
blown through the reel strikes a very limited part of the nearer side of
the halfpenny. In order to escape, it has to make a right-angle turn and
pass between coin and reel, and, while travelling in this direction, loses
most of its repulsive force. The result is that the total pressure on the
underside of the coin, plus the effect of gravity, is exactly balanced by
the atmospheric pressure on the outside, and the coin remains at that
distance from the reel which gives equilibrium of forces. When one stops
blowing, the air pressure on both sides is the same, and gravity makes the
coin fall away.

The function of the pins is merely to keep the halfpenny centred on the
hole. If steam is used instead of human breath, a considerable weight may
be hung from the disc without dislodging it.

The Magic Swingers.--The easily made toy illustrated next is much more
interesting than would appear from the mere picture, as it demonstrates a
very striking physical phenomenon, the transference of energy. If two
pendulums are hung close together from a flexible support and swung, their
movements influence one another in a somewhat remarkable way--the swing of
the one increasing as that of the other dies down, until a certain point is
reached, after which the process is reversed, and the "dying" or "dead"
pendulum commences to come to life again at the expense of the other. This
alternation is repeated over and over again, until all the energy of both
pendulums is exhausted.

[Illustration: FIG. 148.-Magic pendulums.]

To make the experiment more attractive, we substitute for the simplest
possible pendulums--weights at the end of strings--small swings, each
containing a figure sitting or standing on a seat, to the underside of
which is attached a quarter of a pound of lead. To prevent the swings
twisting, they are best made of strong wire bent as shown in Fig. 148, care
being taken that the sides are of equal length, so that both hooks may
press equally on the strings. Eighteen inches is a good length. The longer
the swing, and the heavier the weight, the longer will the experiment last.

The swings are hung, six inches apart, from a stout string stretched
tightly between two well-weighted chairs or between two fixed points. The
string should be at least 4 feet long.

With two equally long and equally weighted pendulums, the three following
experiments may be carried out:--

1. Let one, A, start from rest. The other, B will gradually die, and A
swing to and fro more and more violently, till B at last comes to a dead
stop. Then A will die and B in turn get up speed. The energy originally
imparted to B is thus transferred through the string from one pendulum to
the other an indefinite number of times, with a slight loss at every
alternation, until it is finally exhausted by friction.

2. Swing them in opposite directions, but start A from a higher point than
B. They will each alternately lose and gain motion, but will never come to
rest, and will continue to swing in opposite directions--that is, while A
swings north or east B will be swinging south or west, and vice versa.

3. Start them both in the same direction, but one from a higher point than
the other. There will be the same transference of energy as in (2), but
neither will come to rest between alternations, and they will always swing
in the same direction.

Unequal Lengths.--If for one of the original pendulums we substitute one
a couple of inches longer than the other, but of the same weight, the same
set of three experiments will provide six variations among them, as in each
case either the longer or the shorter may be started first or given the
longer initial swing, as the case may be. The results are interesting
throughout, and should be noted.

Three or more Pendulums.--If  the number of pendulums be increased to
three or more, the length of all being the same, a fresh field for
observation is opened. With an increase of number a decrease in the
individual weighting is advisable, to prevent an undue sagging of the
string.

In conclusion, we may remark that a strong chain stretched between two
trees and a suitable supply of rope will enable the reader and his friends
to carry out all the experiments on a life-size scale.

A Smoke-ring Apparatus.--Get a large tin of the self-opening kind and cut
a hole 2 inches across in the bottom. Then make a neat circular hole 1-1/4
inches in diameter in the centre of a paper disc somewhat smaller than the
bottom of the tin, to which it is pasted firmly on the outside. The other
end--from which the lid is removed--must be covered with a piece of sheet
rubber stretched fairly tight and secured to the tin by string passed over
it behind the rim. An old cycle or motor car air tube, according to the
size of the tin, will furnish the rubber needed; but new material, will
cost only a few pence (Fig. 149).

[Illustration: FIG. 149.--Smoke-ring apparatus.]

A dense smoke is produced by putting in the tin two small rolls of blotting
paper, one soaked in hydrochloric acid, the other in strong ammonia. The
rolls should not touch. To reduce corrosion of the tin by the acid, the
inside should be lined with thin card.

[Illustration: FIG. 150.--Smoke-making apparatus.]

A ring of smoke is projected from the hole in the card if the rubber
diaphragm is pushed inwards. A slow, steady push makes a fat, lazy ring
come out; a smart tap a thinner one, moving much faster. Absolutely still
air is needed for the best effects, as draughts make the rings lose shape
very quickly and move erratically. Given good conditions, a lot of fun can
be got out of the rings by shooting one through another which has expanded
somewhat, or by destroying one by striking it with another, or by
extinguishing a candle set up at a distance, and so on. The experimenter
should notice how a vortex ring rotates in itself while moving forward,
like a rubber ring being rolled along a stick.

A continuous supply of smoke can be provided by the apparatus shown in Fig.
150. The bulb of a scent spray is needed to force ammonia gas through a
box, made air-tight by a rubber band round the lid, in which is a pad
soaked with hydrochloric acid. The smoke formed in this box is expelled
through a pipe into the ring-making box.

Caution.--When dealing with hydrochloric acid, take great care not to get
it on your skin or clothes, as it is a very strong corrosive.



XXVII. A RAIN-GAUGE.

The systematic measurement of rainfall is one of those pursuits which prove
more interesting in the doing than in the prospect. It enables us to
compare one season or one year with another; tells us what the weather has
been while we slept; affords a little mild excitement when thunderstorms
are about; and compensates to a limited extent for the disadvantages of a
wet day.

The general practice is to examine the gauge daily (say at 10 a.m.); to
measure the water, if any, collected during the previous twenty-four hours;
and to enter the record at once. Gauges are made which record automatically
the rainfall on a chart or dial, but these are necessarily much more
expensive than those which merely catch the water for measurement.

This last class, to which our attention will be confined chiefly, all
include two principal parts--a metal receiver and a graduated glass
measure, of much smaller diameter than the receiver, so that the divisions
representing hundredths of an inch may be far enough apart to be
distinguishable. It is evident that the smaller the area of the measure is,
relatively to that of the receiver, the more widely spaced will the
graduation marks of the measure be, and the more exact the readings
obtained.

[Illustration: FIG. 151.--Standard rain-gauge.]

The gauge most commonly used is that shown in Fig. 151. It consists of an
upper cylindrical part, usually 5 or 8 inches in diameter, at the inside of
the rim, with its bottom closed by a funnel. The lower cylindrical part
holds a glass catcher into which the funnel delivers the water for storage
until the time when it will be measured in a graduated glass. The upper
part makes a good fit with the lower, in order to reduce evaporation to a
minimum.

Such a gauge can be bought for half a guinea or so, but one which, if
carefully made, will prove approximately accurate, can be constructed at
very small expense. One needs, in the first place, a cylindrical tin, or,
better still, a piece of brass tubing, about 5 inches high and not less
than 3 inches in diameter. (Experiments have proved that the larger the
area of the receiver the more accurate are the results.) The second
requisite is a piece of stout glass tubing having an internal diameter not
more than one-quarter that of the receiver This is to serve as measuring
glass.

[Illustration: FIG. 152.--Section of homemade rain-gauge.]

The success of the gauge depends entirely upon ascertaining accurately how
much of the tube will be filled by a column of water 1 inch deep and having
the same area as the receiver. This is easily determined as follows:--If a
tin is to be used as receiver, make the bottom and side joints watertight
with solder; if a tube, square off one end and solder a flat metal to it
temporarily. The receptacle is placed on a perfectly level base, and water
is poured in until it reaches exactly to a mark made 4 inches from the end
of a fine wire held perpendicularly. Now cork one end of the tube and pour
in the water, being careful not to spill any, emptying and filling again if
necessary. This will give you the number of tube inches filled by the 4
inches in the receiver. Divide the result by 4, and you will have the depth
unit in the measure representing 1 inch of rainfall. The measuring should
be done several times over, and the average result taken as the standard.
If the readings all agree, so much the better.

Preparing the Scale.--The next thing is to graduate a scale, which will
most conveniently be established in indelible pencil on a carefully
smoothed strip of white wood 1 inch wide. First make a zero mark squarely
across the strip near the bottom, and at the unit distance above it a
similar mark, over which "One Inch" should be written plainly. The distance
between the marks is next divided by 1/2-inch lines into tenths, and these
tenths by 1/4-inch lines into hundredths, which, if the diameter of the
receiver is four times that of the tube, will be about 3/16 inch apart. For
reading, the scale is held against the tube, with the zero mark level with
the top of the cork plugging the bottom. It will, save time and trouble if
both tube and scale are attached permanently to a board, which will also
serve to protect the tube against damage.

Making the Receiver.--A tin funnel, fitting the inside of the receiver
closely, should be obtained, or, if the exact article is not available, a
longer one should be cut down to fit. Make a central hole in the bottom of
the receiver large enough to allow the funnel to pass through up to the
swell, and solder the rim of the funnel to the inside of the receiver,
using as little heat as possible.

If you select a tin of the self-opening kind, you must now cut away the top
with a file or hack-saw, being very careful not to bend the metal, as
distortion, by altering the area of the upper end of the tin, will render
the gauge inaccurate.

The receiver should be supported by another tin of somewhat smaller
diameter, and deep enough to contain a bottle which will hold 3 or 4 inches
of rainfall. In order to prevent water entering this compartment, tie a
strip of rubber (cut out of an old cycle air tube) or other material round
the receiver, and projecting half an inch beyond the bottom (Fig. 152).

All tinned iron surfaces should be given a couple of thin coats or paint.

The standard distance between the rain gauge and the ground is one foot.
The amount caught decreases with increase of elevation, owing to the
greater effect of the wind. The top of the gauge must be perfectly level,
so that it may offer the same catchment area to rain from whatever
direction it may come.

[Illustration: FIG. 153.--Self-measuring gauge.]

Another Arrangement.--To simplify measurement, the receiver and tube may
be arranged as shown in Fig. 153. In this case the water is delivered
directly into the measure, and the rainfall may be read at a glance. On the
top of the support is a small platform for the receiver, its centre
directly over the tube. The graduations, first made on a rod as already
described, may be transferred, by means of a fine camel's hair brush and
white paint, to the tube itself. To draw off the water after taking a
reading, a hole should be burnt with a hot wire through the bottom cork.
This hole is plugged with a piece of slightly tapered brass rod, pushed in
till its top is flush with the upper surface of the cork.

If the tube has small capacity, provision should be made for catching the
overflow by inserting through the cork a small tube reaching to a
convenient height-say the 1-inch mark. The bottom of the tube projects into
a closed storage vessel. Note that the tube must be in position before the
graduation is determined, otherwise the readings will exaggerate the
rainfall.

[Illustration: FIG. 154.--Gauge in case.]

Protection against the Weather.--A rain-gauge of this kind requires
protection against frost, as the freezing of the water would burst the
tube. It will be sufficient to hinge to the front of the support a piece of
wood half an inch thicker than the diameter of the tube, grooved out so as
to fit the tube when shut round it (Fig 154).



XXVIII.  WIND VANES WITH DIALS.

It is difficult to tell from a distance in which direction the arrow of a
wind vane points when the arrow lies obliquely to the spectator, or points
directly towards or away from him. In the case of a vane set up in some
position where it will be plainly visible from the house, this difficulty
is overcome by making the wind vane operate an arrow moving round a
vertical dial set square to the point of observation. Figs. 155 to 157 are
sketches and diagrams of an apparatus which does the work very
satisfactorily. The vane is attached to the upper end of a long rod,
revolving freely in brackets attached to the side of a pole. The bottom end
of the rod is pointed to engage with a nick in a bearer, in which it moves
with but little friction. Near the end is fixed a horizontal bevel-wheel,
engaging with a vertical bevel of equal size and number of teeth attached
to a short rod running through a hole in the post to an arrow on the other
side. Between arrow and post is room for a dial on which the points of the
compass are marked.

The construction of the apparatus is so simple as to call for little
comment. The tail of the vane is made of two pieces of zinc, tapering from
8 inches wide at the rear to 4 inches at the rod, to which they are clipped
by 4 screws and nuts. A stay soldered between them near the stern keeps the
broader ends a couple of inches apart, giving to the vane a wedge shape
which is more sensitive to the wind than a single flat plate. The pointer
also is cut out of sheet metal, and is attached to the tail by means of the
screws already mentioned. It must, of course, be arranged to lie in a line
bisecting the angle formed by the two parts of the tail.

[Illustration: FIG. 165--Wind vane with dial.]

The rod should preferably be of brass, which does not corrode like iron. If
the uppermost 18 inches or so are of 1/4-inch diameter, and assigned a
bracket some distance below the one projecting from the top of the pole,
the remainder of the rod need not exceed 1/8 to 5/32 inch in diameter, as
the twisting strain on it is small. Or the rod may be built up of wooden
rods, well painted, alternating with brass at the points where the brackets
are.

[Illustration: FIG. 156.--Elevation and plan of vane.]

The Bevel Gearing.--Two brass bevel wheels, about 1 inch in diameter, and
purchasable for a couple of shillings or less, should be obtained to
transmit the vane movements to the dial arrow. Grooved pulleys, and a belt
would do the work, but not so positively, and any slipping would, of
course, render the dial readings incorrect. The arrow spindle (of brass)
turns in a brass tube, driven tightly into a hole of suitable size bored
through the centre of the post (Fig. 157). It will be well to fix a little
metal screen over the bevel gear to protect it from the weather.

[Illustration: FIG. 157.--Details of bevel gear and arrow.]

The Dial--This is made of tinned iron sheet or of 1/4-inch wood nailed to
1/2-inch battens. It is held up to the post by 3-inch screws passing
through front and battens. At the points of contact, the pole is slightly
flattened to give a good bearing; and, to prevent the dial being twisted
off by the wind, strip iron or stout galvanized wire stays run from one end
of a batten to the other behind the post, to which they are secured.

The post should be well painted, the top protected by a zinc disc laid
under the top bracket, and the bottom, up to a point 6 inches above the
ground level, protected by charring or by a coat of boiled tar, before the
dial and the brackets for the vane rod to turn in are fastened on. A white
dial and black arrow and letters will be most satisfactory against a dark
background; and vice versa for a light background. The letters are of
relatively little importance, as the position of the arrow will be
sufficient indication.

It gives little trouble to affix to the top of the pole 4 arms, each
carrying the initial of one of the cardinal points of the compass. The
position of these relatively to the direction in which the dial will face
must be carefully thought out before setting the position in the ground. In
any case the help of a compass will be needed to decide which is the north.

Having set in the post and rammed the earth tightly round it, loosen the
bracket supporting the vane rod so that the vane bevel clears the dial
bevel. Turn the vane to true north, set the dial arrow also to north, and
raise the bevel so that it meshes, and make the bracket tight.

Note.--In the vicinity of London true north is 15 degrees east of the
magnetic north.

The pole must be long enough to raise the vane clear of any objects which
might act as screens, and its length will therefore depend on its position.
As for the height of the dial above the ground, this must be left to
individual preference or to circumstances. If conditions allow, it should
be near enough to the ground to be examined easily with a lamp at night, as
one of the chief advantages of the system is that the reading is
independent of the visibility of the vane.

A Dial Indoors.--If some prominent part of the house, such as a chimney
stack, be used to support the pole--which in such a case can be quite
short--it is an easy matter to connect the vane with a dial indoors,
provided that the rod can be run down an outside wall.

An Electrically Operated Dial.--Thanks to the electric current, it is
possible to cause a wind vane, wherever it may be set, to work a dial
situated anywhere indoors. A suggested method of effecting this is
illustrated in Figs. 158 to 161, which are sufficiently explicit to enable
the reader to fill in details for himself.

[Illustration: FIG. 158.--Plan and elevation of electric contact on vane
post.]

In-this case the vane is attached (Fig. 158) to a brass tube, closed at the
upper end, and supported by a long spike stuck into the top of the pole. A
little platform carries a brass ring, divided into as many insulated
segments as the points which the vane is to be able to register. Thus,
there will be eight segments if the half-points as well as the cardinal
points are to be shown on the dial. The centre of each of these segments
lies on a line running through the centre of the spike to the compass point
to which the segment belongs. The tube moves with it a rotating contact
piece, which rubs against the tops of the segments.

Below it is a "brush" of strip brass pressing against the tube. This brush
is connected with a wire running to one terminal of a battery near the
dial.

[Illustration: FIG. 159.--Magnetic recording dial.]

The Dial.--This may be either vertical or horizontal, provided that the
arrow is well balanced. The arrow, which should be of some light
non-magnetic material, such as cardboard or wood, carries on its lower
side, near the point, a piece of soft iron. Under the path of this piece is
a ring of equally spaced magnets, their number equaling that of, the
segments on the vane. Between arrow and magnets is the dial on which the
points are marked (Fig. 159).

Each segment is connected by a separate wire with the corresponding dial
magnet, and each of these, through a common wire and switch, with the other
terminal of the battery (Fig. 161).

In order to ascertain the quarter of the wind, the switch is closed. The
magnet which is energized will attract the needle to it, showing in what
direction the vane is pointing. To prevent misreading, the dial may be
covered by a flap the raising of which closes the battery circuit. A spring
should be arranged to close the flap when the hand is removed, to prevent
waste of current.

[Illustration: FIG. 160.--Another type of electric dial with compass
needle for pointer.]

The exactitude of the indication given by the arrow depends on the number
of vane segments used. If these are only four, a N. read- ing will be given
by any position of the vane between N.E. and N.W.; if eight, N. will mean
anything between N.N.E. and N.N.W. Telephone cables, containing any desired
number of insulated wires, each covered by a braiding of a distinctive
colour, can be obtained at a cost only slightly exceeding that of an equal
total amount of single insulated wire. The cable form is to be preferred,
on account of its greater convenience in fixing.

The amount of battery power required depends on the length of the circuit
and the delicacy of the dial. If an ordinary compass needle be used, as
indicated in Fig. 160, very little current is needed. In this case the
magnets, which can be made of a couple of dozen turns of fine insulated
wire round a 1/8-in soft iron bar, should be arranged spokewise round the
compass case, and care must be taken that all the cores are wound in the
same direction, so as to have the same polarity. Otherwise some will
attract the N. end of the needle and others repel it. The direction of the
current flow through the circuit will decide the polarity of the magnets,
so that, if one end of the needle be furnished with a little paper
arrow-head, the "correspondence" between vane and dial is easily
established. An advantage attaching to the use of a compass needle is that
the magnet repels the wrong end of the needle.

[Illustration: FIG. 161.--General arrangement of electric wind recorder.]

The brush and segments must be protected from he weather by a cover, either
attached to the segment platform or to the tube on which the vane is
mounted.

The spaces between the segments must be filled in flush with some
non-conducting material, such as fibre, vulcanite, or sealing-wax; and be
very slightly wider than the end of the contact arm, so that two segments
may not be in circuit simultaneously. In certain positions of the vane no
contact will be made, but, as the vane is motionless only when there is no
wind or none to speak of, this is a small matter.



XXIX. A STRENGTH-TESTING MACHINE.

The penny-in-the-slot strength-testing machine is popular among men and
boys, presumably because many of them like to show other people what their
muscles are capable of, and the opportunity of proving it on a graduated
dial is therefore tempting, especially if there be a possibility of
recovering the penny by an unusually good performance.

For the expenditure of quite a small number of pence, one may construct a
machine which will show fairly accurately what is the value of one's grip
and the twisting, power of the arms; and, even if inaccurate, will serve
for competitive purposes. The apparatus is very simple in principle,
consisting of but five pieces of wood, an ordinary spring balance
registering up to 40 lbs., and a couple of handles. The total cost is but a
couple of shillings at the outside.

Fig. 162 is a plan of the machine as used for grip measuring. The base is a
piece of deal 1 inch thick, 2 feet long, and 5-1/2 inches wide. The lever,
L, is pivoted at P, attached to a spring balance at Q, and subjected to the
pull of the hand at a point, R.

The pressure exerted at R is to that registered at Q as the distance PQ is
to the distance PR. As the spring balance will not record beyond 40 lbs.,
the ratio of PQ to PR may conveniently be made 5 to 1, as this will allow
for the performances of quite a strong man; but even if the ratio be
lowered to 4 to 1, few readers will stretch the balance to its limit.

The balance should preferably be of the type shown in Fig. 162, having an
indicator projecting at right angles to the scale through a slot, as this
can be very easily fitted with a sliding index, I, in the form of a
1/4-inch strip of tin bent over at the ends to embrace the edges of the
balance.


CONSTRUCTION.

[Illustration: FIG. 162.--Plan of strength tester.]

[Illustration: FIG. 163.--Grips of strength tester.]

As the pressures on the machine are high, the construction must be solid
throughout. The lever frame, A, and pivot piece, C, should be of one-inch
oak, and the two last be screwed very securely to the baseboard. The shape
of A is shown in Fig. 163. The inside is cut out with a pad saw, a square
notch being formed at the back for the lever to move in. The handles of an
old rubber chest expander come in useful for the grips. One grip, D, is
used entire for attachment to the lever; while of the other only the wooden
part is required, to be mounted on a 1/4-inch steel bar running through the
arms of A near the ends of the horns. If a handle of this kind is not
available for D, one may substitute for it a piece of metal tubing of not
less than 1/2-inch diameter, or a 3/4-inch wooden rod, attached to an eye
on the lever by a wire passing through its centre.

A handle, if used, is joined to the lever by means of a brass plate 3/4
inch wide and a couple of inches long. A hole is bored in the centre
somewhat smaller than the knob to which the rubber was fastened, and joined
up to one long edge by a couple of saw cuts. Two holes for good-sized
screws must also be drilled and countersunk, and a socket for the knob must
be scooped out of the lever. After making screw holes in the proper
positions, pass the shank of the knob through the slot in the plate, and
screw the plate on the lever. This method holds the handle firmly while
allowing it to move freely.

The lever tapers from 1-1/2 inches at the pivot to 5/8 inch at the balance
end. The hole for the pivot--5/16-inch steel bar--should be long enough to
admit a piece of tubing fitting the bar, to diminish friction, and an
important point, be drilled near the handle edge of the lever, so as to
leave plenty of wood to take the strain. The last remark also applies to
the hole for the balance pin at Q.

The balance support, B, and the pivot piece, C, are 2-1/2 and 2-7/16
inches high respectively. Run a hole vertically through C and the baseboard
for the pivot, which should be 4-1/2 inches long, so as to project 1 inch
when driven right home. Take some trouble over getting the holes in L and C
quite square to the baseboard, as any inaccuracy will make the lever twist
as it moves. To prevent the pivot cutting into the wood, screw to the top
of C a brass plate bored to fit the pivot accurately. The strain will then
be shared by the screws.

The horns of A should be long enough to allow the outside of the fixed grip
to be 2-1/4 inches from the inside of the handle.

The balance is secured first to the lever by a pin driven through the eye
of the hook, and then to B by a 3-inch screw passed through the ring. The
balance should just not be in tension.

When the apparatus is so far complete, test it by means of a second balance
applied to D. Set the scale-marker at zero, and pull on the D balance till,
say, 35 lbs. is attained. If the fixed balance shows 7 lbs. on what is
meant to be a 5 to 1 ratio, the setting of  R relatively to P and Q is
correct. If, however, there is a serious discrepancy, it would be worth
while making tests with a very strong balance, and establishing a corrected
gradation on a paper dial pasted to the face of E.

For twisting tests we need a special handle (see Fig. 164), which is
slipped on to the pivot and transmits the twist to L through a pin pressing
on the back of the lever. The stirrup is made out of strip iron, bent to
shape and drilled near the ends for the grip spindle. To the bottom is
screwed and soldered a brass or iron plate, into the underside of which the
pin is driven.

[Illustration: FIG. 164.--Handle for twisting test.]

To prevent the handle bending over, solder round the pivot hole 3/4 inch of
brass tubing, fitting the pivot closely.

Tests.--Grip tests should be made with each hand separately. The
baseboard should lie flat on a table or other convenient support, and be
steadied, but not pushed, by the hand not gripping.

Twisting tests may be made inwards with the right hand, and back-handedly
with the left. The apparatus is stood on edge, square to the performer,
resting on the horns of A and a support near the balance.

Finger tests are made by placing the thumb on the front face of B, and two
fingers on the farther side of the lever, one to the left and the other to
the right of the tail of the balance.



XXX. LUNG-TESTING APPARATUS.

The capacity of the lungs, and their powers of inspiration and expiration,
can be tested by means of easily constructed apparatus which will interest
most people who are introduced to it. The reduction of the capabilities of
the lungs to figures affords a not unprofitable form of entertainment, as
even among adults these figures will be found to vary widely.

Air Volume Measuring.--The air which the lungs deal with is
scientifically classified under four heads:

1. Tidal air, which passes into and out of the lungs in natural breathing.
About 30 cubic inches in an adult (average).

2. Reserve air, which can be expelled after a normal expiration. About 100
cubic inches.

3. Complemental air, which can be drawn in after a normal inspiration.
About 100 cubic inches.

4. Residual air, which cannot be removed from the lungs under any
conditions by voluntary effort. About 120 cubic inches.

The first three added together give the vital capacity. This, as an
addition sum will show, is very much greater than the volume of air taken
in during a normal inspiration.

The simplest method of testing the capacity of an individual pair of lungs
is embodied in the apparatus shown in Figs. 165 and 166. A metal box is
submerged, bottom upwards, in a tank of somewhat larger dimensions, until
the water is level with the bottom inside and out. A counterweight is
attached to the smaller box to place it almost in equilibrium, so that if
air is blown into the box it will at once begin to rise.

If we make the container 7-1/16 inches square inside, in plan, every inch
it rises will represent approximately 50 cubic inches of air blown in; and
a height of 7 inches, by allowing for 325 cubic inches, with a minimum
immersion of half an inch, should suffice even for unusually capacious
lungs. The outside box need not be more than 8 inches all ways.

[Illustration: FIG. 166.--Section of lung-capacity tester.]

Unless you are an expert with the soldering iron, the making of the boxes
should be deputed to a professional tinman, who would turn out the pair for
quite a small charge. Specify very thin zinc for the air vessel, and have
the top edges stiffened so that they may remain straight.

On receiving the boxes, cut a hole 3/4-inch diameter in the centre of the
bottom of the air vessel, and solder round it a piece of tubing, A, 1 inch
long, on the outside of the box. In the centre of the larger box make a
hole large enough to take a tube, E, with an internal diameter of 1/8 inch.
This tube is 8 inches long and must be quite straight. Next procure a
straight wire, C, that fits the inside of the small tube easily; make an
eye at the end, and cut off about 9 inches. Bore a hole for the wire in a
metal disc 1 inch across.

[Illustration: FIG. 166.--Perspective view of lung-capacity tester.]

The air container is then placed in the water box and centred by means of
wooden wedges driven in lightly at the corners. Push the small tube through
its hole in the water box, and thrust the wire--after passing it through
the disc and the projection on the air container--into the tube. The tube
should reach nearly to the top of the air container, and the wire to the
bottom of the water box. Solder the tube to the box, the wire to the disc,
and the disc to the container. A little stay, S, will render the tube less
liable to bend the bottom of the box. Plug the tube at the bottom.

The wire sliding in the tube will counteract any tendency of the container
to tilt over as it rises.

A nozzle, D, for the air tube is soldered into the side of A, as shown.

The counterweight is attached to the container by a piece of fine strong
twine which passes over two pulleys, mounted on a crossbar of a frame
screwed to the sides of the water box, or to an independent base. The
bottom of the central pulley should be eight inches above the top of the
container, when that is in its lowest position.

For recording purposes, make a scale of inches and tenths, and the
corresponding volumes of air, on the side of the upright next the
counterweight. The wire, W, is arranged between counterweight and upright
so that an easily sliding plate, P, may be pushed down it by the weight, to
act as index.

[Illustration: FIG. 167.--Apparatus for showing lung power.]

Notes.--The pulleys must work easily, to reduce friction, which renders
the readings inaccurate. Absolute accuracy is not obtainable by this
apparatus, as the rising of the container lowers the water level slightly,
and the air has to support part of the weight of the container which was
previously borne by the water. But the inaccuracy is so small as to be
practically negligible.


A Pressure Recorder.

[Transcribers note: Even with the precautions used in this project, health
standards of 2004 would consider any exposure to mercury dangerous. Water
could be substituted and the column lengths scaled up by about 13.5.]

If mercury is poured into a vertical tube closed at the bottom, a pressure
is exerted on the bottom in the proportion of approximately one pound per
square inch for every two inches depth of mercury. Thus, if the column is
30 inches high the bottom pressure is slightly under 15 lbs. per square
inch.

This fact is utilized in the pressure recorder shown in Fig. 167, a
U-shaped glass tube half filled with mercury. A rubber tube is attached to
the bent-over end of one of the legs, so that the effects of blowing or
suction may be communicated to the mercury in that leg. Normally the
mercury stands level in both tubes at what may be called the zero mark. Any
change of level in one leg is accompanied by an equal change in the
opposite direction in the other. Therefore, if by blowing the mercury is
made to rise an inch in the left leg, the pressure exerted is obviously
that required to support a two-inch column of mercury--that is, 1 lb. per
sq. inch. This gives a very convenient standard of measurement, as every
inch rise above the zero mark indicates 1 lb. of pressure.


CONSTRUCTION.

The mercury tube should be made first. Take a piece of glass tubing 20
inches long, and bend it at a point 9 inches from one end after heating in
a spirit flame. The legs should be kept as parallel as possible. Lay the
tube, while the heated part is still pliant, on a flat surface, the bend
projecting over the edge, So that the two legs shall be in line. When the
glass has cooled, bend over two inches of the longer leg to an angle of
about 45 degrees.

A standard for the tube is now made out of one-inch wood. Hollow out a bed
in which the tube shall lie and be completely protected. To the right of
the tube the standard is notched to take a small bottle. The notch should
be slightly narrower than the diameter of the bottle, and have its sides
hollowed out to fit.

Halfway up the tube draw a zero mark across the standards, and above this a
scale of inches in fractions on both sides. Each inch represents 1 lb.
pressure.

The cork of the bottle must be pierced with a red-hot wire for two glass
tubes, one of which is bent over for the blowing tube. Both tubes should be
pointed at the bottle end so that they may enter the cork easily. Make the
top of the cork air tight with sealing-wax. The purpose of the bottle is to
catch any mercury that might be sucked out of the tube; one does not wish
mercurial poisoning to result from the experiments. Also it prevents any
saliva entering the mercury tube.

When the latter has been secured to the standard by a couple of slips of
tin nailed to the front, connect it up with the bottle, and fill it up to
the zero mark with mercury poured in through a small paper funnel.

The open end of the tube should be provided with an inch of tubing. Clips
placed on this and on the rubber connection between tube and bottle will
prevent the escape of mercury should the apparatus be upset when not in
use.

The average blowing pressure of which the lungs are capable is about 1-1/2
lbs. per square inch; inspiration pressure without mouth suction about 1
lb. per square inch; suction pressure 2-1/2 to 3 lbs. per square inch.

Caution.--Don't ask people with weak lungs to try experiments with the
apparatus described in this chapter.



XXXI. HOME-MADE HARMONOGRAPHS.

Have you ever heard of the harmonograph? If not, or if at the most you have
very hazy ideas as to what it is, let me explain. It is an instrument for
recording on paper, or on some other suitable surface, the figures
described by two or more pendulums acting in concert.

The simplest form of harmonograph is shown in Fig. 168. Two pendulums are
so suspended on points that their respective directions of movement are at
right angles to one another--that is, pendulum A can swing only north and
south, as it were, and pendulum B only east and west. On the top of B is a
platform to carry a card, and on the upper end of A a lever is pivoted so
as to be able to swing only vertically upwards and downwards. At its end
this lever carries a pen, which when at rest lies on the centre of the card
platform.

[Illustration:  FIG. 168.--Simple Rectilinear Harmonograph.]

The bob, or weight, of a pendulum can be clamped at any point on its rod,
so that the rate or "period" of swing may be adjusted or altered. The
nearer the weight is brought to the point of suspension, the oftener will
the pendulum swing to and fro in a given time--usually taken as one minute.
From this it is obvious that the rates of swing of the two pendulums can be
adjusted relatively to one another. If they are exactly equal, they are
said to be in unison, and under these conditions the instrument would trace
figures varying in outline between the extremes of a straight line on the
one hand and a circle on the other. A straight line would result if both
pendulums were released at the same time, a circle,[1]  if one were
released when the other had half finished a swing, and the intermediate
ellipses would be produced by various alterations of  "phase," or time of
the commencement of the swing of one pendulum relatively to the
commencement of the swing of the other.

[Footnote 1: It should be pointed out here that the presence of friction
reduces the "amplitude," or distance through which a pendulum moves, at
every swing; so that a true circle cannot be produced by free swinging
pendulums, but only a spiral with coils very close together.]

But the interest of the harmonograph centres round the fact that the
periods of the pendulums can be tuned to one another. Thus, if A be set to
swing twice while B swings three times, an entirely new series of figures
results; and the variety is further increased by altering the respective
amplitudes of swing and phase of the pendulums.

We have now gone far enough to be able to point out why the harmonograph is
so called. In the case just mentioned the period rates of A and B are as 2:
3. Now, if the note C on the piano be struck the strings give a certain
note, because they vibrate a certain number of times per second. Strike the
G next above the C, and you get a note resulting from strings vibrating
half as many times again per second as did the C strings--that is, the
relative rates of vibration of notes C and G are the same as those of
pendulums A and B--namely, as 2 is to 3. Hence the "harmony" of the
pendulums when so adjusted is known as a "major fifth," the musical chord
produced by striking C and G simultaneously.

In like manner if A swings four times to B's five times, you get a "major
third;" if five times to B's six times, a "minor third;" and if once to B's
three times, a "perfect twelfth;" if thrice to B's five times, a "major
sixth;" if once to B's twice, an "octave;" and so on.

So far we have considered the figures obtained by two pendulums swinging in
straight lines only. They are beautiful and of infinite variety, and one
advantage attaching to this form of harmonograph is, that the same figure
can be reproduced exactly an indefinite number of times by releasing the
pendulums from the same points.

[Illustration: FIG. 169.--Goold's Twin Elliptic Pendulum Hamonograph.]

But a fresh field is opened if for the one-direction suspension of pendulum
B we substitute a gimbal, or universal joint, permitting movement in all
directions, so that the pendulum is able to describe a more or less
circular path. The figures obtained by this simple modification are the
results of compounded rectilinear and circular movements.

[Illustration: FIG. 170.--Benham's miniature Twin Elliptic Pendulum
Harmonograph.]

The reader will probably now see even fresh possibilities if both
pendulums are given universal movement. This can be effected with the
independent pendulums; but a more convenient method of obtaining equivalent
results is presented in the Twin Elliptic Pendulum invented by Mr. Joseph
Goold, and shown in Fig. 169. It consists of--(1) a long pendulum, free to
swing in all directions, suspended from the ceiling or some other suitable
point. The card on which the figure is to be traced, and the weights, are
placed on a platform at the bottom of this pendulum. (2) A second and
shorter free pendulum, known as the "deflector," hung from the bottom of
the first.

This form of harmonograph gives figures of infinite variety and of extreme
beauty and complexity. Its chief drawback is its length and weight, which
render it more or less of a fixture.

Fortunately, Mr. C. E. Benham of Colchester has devised a Miniature Twin
Elliptic Pendulum which possesses the advantages of the Goold, but can be
transported easily and set up anywhere. This apparatus is sketched in Fig.
170. The main or platform pendulum resembles in this case that of the
Rectilinear Harmonograph, the card platform being above the point of
suspension.

Value of the Harmonograph.--A small portable harmonograph will be found
to be a good means of entertaining friends at home or elsewhere. The
gradual growth of the figure, as the card moves to and fro under the pen,
will arouse the interest of the least scientifically inclined person; in
fact, the trouble is rather to persuade spectators that they have had
enough than to attract their attention. The cards on which designs have
been drawn are in great request, so that the pleasure of the entertainment
does not end with the mere exhibition. An album filled with picked designs,
showing different harmonies and executed in inks of various colours, is a
formidable rival to the choicest results of the amateur photographer's
skill.


Practical Instructions for making Harmonographs.

Pendulums.--For the Rectilinear type of harmonograph wooden rods 5/8 to
3/4 inch in diameter will be found very suitable. They cost about 2d. each.
Be careful to select straight specimens. The upper pendulum of the
Miniature Twin Elliptic type should be of stouter stuff, say a broomstick;
that of the Goold apparatus stouter still.

All pendulums on which weights are slid up and down should be graduated in
inches and fractions, reckoning from the point of suspension as zero. The
graduation makes it easy to re-establish any harmony after the weights have
been shifted.

Suspensions.--For a harmonograph to give satisfaction it is necessary
that very little friction should be set up at the point of suspension, so
that the pendulums may lose amplitude of swing very slowly.

One-way suspensions are easily made. Two types, the point and knife-edge
respectively, are shown in Fig. 168 and the top part of Fig. 172. The point
suspension is most suitable for small rods and moderate weights; the
knife-edge for large rods and heavy weights which would tend to crush a
fine point.

[Illustration: FIG. 171.--Gimbal giving universal movement: point
suspension.]

Points should rest in cup-shaped depressions in a metal plate; knife-edges
in V-shaped grooves in a metal ring.

[Illustration: FIG. 172.--Knife-edge universal-motion gimbal.]

Screws turned or filed to a sharp end make convenient points, as they can
be quickly adjusted so that a line joining the points lies exactly at right
angles to the pendulum. The cups to take the points should not be drilled
until the points have been thus adjusted. Make a punch mark on the
bedplate, and using this as centre for one of the points, describe an arc
of a circle with the other. This will give the exact centre for the other
cup. It is evident that if points and cup centres do not coincide exactly
there must be a certain amount of jamming and consequent friction.

In making a knife-edge, such as that shown in Fig. 172, put the finishing
touches on with a flat file drawn lengthwise to ensure the edge being
rectilinear. For the same reason the V slots in the ring support should be
worked out together. If they are formed separately, the chances are against
their being in line with one another.

Gimbals, or universal joints, giving motion in all directions, require the
employment of a ring which supports one pair of edges or points (Fig. 172),
and is itself supported on another pair of edges or points set at right
angles to the first. The cups or nicks in the ring should come halfway
through, so that all four points of suspension shall be in the same plane.
If they are not, the pendulum will not have the same swing-period in all
directions. If a gimbal does not work with equal freedom in all ways, there
will be a tendency for the pendulum to lose motion in the direction in
which most friction occurs.

By wedging up the ring of a gimbal the motion of the pendulum is changed
from universal to rectilinear. If you are making a harmonograph of the type
shown in Fig. 168, use a gimbal for the platform pendulum, and design it so
that the upper suspension gives a motion at right angles to the pen
pendulum. The use of two little wedges will then convert the apparatus in a
moment from semirectilinear to purely rectilinear.

Weights.--The provision of weights which can be slipped up and down a rod
may present some difficulty. Of iron and lead, lead is the more convenient
material, as occupying less space, weight for weight, and being more easily
cast or shaped. I have found thin sheet roofing lead, running 2 lbs. to the
square foot, very suitable for making weights, by rolling a carefully
squared strip of the material round the rod on which it will have to move,
or round a piece of brass tubing which fits the rod. When the weight has
been rolled, drill four holes in it, on opposite sides near the ends, to
take nails, shortened so that they just penetrate all the laps but do not
enter the central circular space. These will prevent the laps sliding over
one another endways. A few turns of wire round the weight over the heads
makes everything snug.

Just one caution here. The outside lap of lead should finish at the point
on the circumference where the first lap began, for the weight to be
approximately symmetrical about the centre.

An alternative method is to melt up scrap lead and cast weights in tins or
flowerpots sunk in sand, using an accurately centred stick as the core.
This stick should be very slightly larger than the pendulum rod, to allow
for the charring away of the outside by the molten metal. (Caution.--The
mould must be quite dry.)

Failing lead, tin canisters filled with metal scrap may be made to serve.
It will in this case be necessary to bore the lid and bottom centrally and
solder in a tube fitting the rod, and to make an opening through which the
weighting material can be inserted.

Adjustment of Weights.--As lead is too soft a metal to give a
satisfactory purchase to a screw--a thread cut in it soon wears out--it is
better to support a leaden weight from underneath by means of a brass
collar and screw. A collar is easily made out of a bit of tubing thickened
at the point where the screw will pass by soldering on a suitably shaped
piece of metal. Drill through the reinforcement and tubing and tap to suit
the screw used, which may well be a camera tail screw, with a large flat
head.

I experienced some trouble from the crushing of wooden rods by a screw, but
got over it as follows. The tubing selected for the collar was large enough
to allow a piece of slightly smaller tubing to be introduced between it and
the rod. This inner piece was slit from one end almost to the other, on
opposite sides, and soldered at one end to the outer tube, a line joining
the slots being at right angles to the axis of the screw. The pressure of
the screw point was thus distributed over a sufficient area of the wood to
prevent indentation. (See Fig. 173.)

[Illustration: FIG. 173.]

[Illustration: FIG. 174.--Pivot for pen lever.]

Pen Levers.--The pen lever, of whatever kind it be, must work on its
pivots with very little friction, and be capable of fine adjustment as
regards balance. For the Rectilinear Harmonograph the form of lever pivot
shown in Fig. 174 is very suitable. The spindle is a wire nail or piece of
knitting needle sharpened at both ends; the bearings, two screws filed flat
at the ends and notched with a drill.

The brass standard should be drilled and tapped to fit the screws fairly
tight, so that when once adjusted they may not slacken off. If the lever is
made of wood, the tail may be provided with a number of metal pegs on which
to place the weights; if of wire, the tail should be threaded so that a
brass weight and lock screw may be moved along it to any desired position.
It is very important that the pressure of the pen on the card should be
reduced to a minimum by proper balancing, as the friction generated by a
"heavy" pen slows the pendulum very quickly; and that the centre of gravity
should be below the point of suspension, to put the pen in stable
equilibrium. The lever shown in Fig. 169 is suitable for the Twin Elliptic
Pendulum.

In this case the lever is not moved about as a whole. Mr. C. E. Benham
advocates the use of wood covered with velvet to rest the lever points on.

For keeping the pen, when not in use, off the platform, a small weight
attached to the lever by a thread is convenient. When the pen is working,
the weight is raised to slacken the thread.

[Illustration: FIG. 175.--End of pen lever.]

Attaching Pen to Lever.--In the case of wooden levers, it is sufficient
to slit the end centrally for a few inches after drilling a hole rather
smaller than the pen, at a point which lies over the centre of the card
platform, and quite squarely to the lever in all directions, so that the
pen point may rest squarely on the card. (Fig. 175.)

Another method is to attach to the end of the lever a vertical half-tube
of tin, against which the pen is pressed by small rubber bands; but even
more convenient is a small spring clip shaped as in Fig. 176.

[Illustration: FIG. 176.--Clip to hold glass pen.]

The card platform should be perfectly flat. This is essential for the
production of good diagrams. If wood is used, it is advisable to glue two
thin pieces together under pressure, with the grain of one running at right
angles to the other, to prevent warping.

Another important point is to have the card platform square to the rod. If
a piece of tubing fitting the rod is turned up true in the lathe and
soldered to a disc screwed to the underside of the table, perpendicularity
will be assured, and incidentally the table is rendered detachable.

To hold the card in place on the table, slit a spring of an old
photographic printing frame down the middle, and screw the two halves,
convex side upwards, by one end near two opposite corners of the platform.
(See Fig. 170.) If cards of the same size are always used, the table should
be marked to assist adjustment.

Making Pens.--The most satisfactory form of pen is undoubtedly a piece of
glass tubing drawn out to a point, which is ground down quite smooth. The
making of such pens is rather a tedious business, but if care be taken of
the pen when made it will last an indefinite time.

Tubing 3/16 or 1/8 inch in external diameter is suitable. Break it up (by
nicking with a file) into 9-inch lengths. Take a piece and hold its centre
in the flame of a small spirit lamp, and revolve it till it softens. Then
draw the glass out in as straight a line as possible, so that the points
may be central. If the drawing is done too fast, the points will be much
too long to be of any use: half an inch of taper is quite enough.

Assuming that a point of satisfactory shape has been attained--and one
must expect some failures before this happens--the pen may be placed in the
pen lever and ground down on a perfectly clean wet hone laid on the card
platform, which should be given a circular movement. Weight the lever so as
to put a fair pressure on the point.

The point should be examined from time to time under a strong
magnifying-glass, and tested by blowing through it into a glass of water.
For very liquid ink the hole should be as small as you can possibly get it;
thick inks, such as Indian, require coarser pens.

The sharp edge is taken off and the width of the point reduced by drawing
the pen at an angle along the stone, revolving it all the time. The nearer
to the hole you can wear the glass away the finer will be the line made by
the pen.

Another method is as follows:--Seal the point by holding it a moment in the
flame. A tiny bulb forms on the end, and this has to be ground away till
the central hole is reached. This is ascertained by the water test, or by
holding the pen point upwards, so that light is reflected from the tip, and
examining it under the magnifier. Then grind the edge off, as in the first
case.

Care of Pens.--The ink should be well strained, to remove the smallest
particles of  "suspended matter," and be kept corked. Fill the pen by
suction. On no account allow the ink to dry in the pen. Squirt any ink out
of it when it is done with, and place it point downwards in a vessel of
water, which should have a soft rubber pad at the bottom, and be kept
covered to exclude dust. Or the pen may be cleaned out with water and
slipped into a holder made by rolling up a piece of corrugated
packing-paper. If the point gets stopped up, stand the pen in nitric or
sulphuric acid, which will probably dissolve the obstruction; and
afterwards wash it out.

Inks.--I have found Stephens's coloured inks very satisfactory, and can
recommend them.

Paper and Cards.--The paper or cards used to draw the figures on should
not have a coated surface, as the coating tends to clog the pen. The
cheapest suitable material is hot pressed paper, a few penny-worths of
which will suffice for many designs. Plain white cards with a good surface
can be bought for from 8s. to 10s. per thousand.

Lantern Slides.--Moisten one side of a clean lantern slide plate with
paraffin and hold it over a candle flame till it is a dead black all over.
Very fine tracings can be obtained on the smoked surface if a fine steel
point is substituted for the glass pen. The design should be protected by a
cover-glass attached to it by a binding strip round the edges.


Details of Harmonographs.

The reader may be interested in details of the apparatus shown in Figs. 168
and 170, made by the writer.

The Rectilinear Harmonograph, shown in Fig. 168, has pendulums of  5/8-inch
wood, 40 inches long, suspended 30 inches from the lower ends, and set 10
inches apart, centre to centre. The suspensions are of the point type. The
weights scale 5 lbs. each. The platform pendulum is provided with a second
weight, which can be affixed above the suspension to slow that pendulum for
2:3, 4:5, 7:8, and higher harmonies.

The baseboard is plain, and when the apparatus is in action its ends are
supported on boxes or books laid on two tables, or on other convenient
supports. The whole apparatus can be taken to pieces very quickly for
transport. The total cost of materials used did not exceed 3s. 6d.

The Twin Elliptic Pendulum of Fig. 170 is supported on a tripod base made
of three pieces of 1-1/2 x 1-1/2 inch wood, 40 inches long, with ends cut
off to an angle of 72 degrees to give a convenient straddle, screwed at the
top to an oak head 3/4 inch thick, and braced a foot below the top by
horizontal crossbars 2 inches wide and 1/2 inch thick. For transport this
stand can be replaced by a flat baseboard similar to that of the
Rectilinear Harmonograph described in the last paragraph.

The main pendulum is a straight ash rod, 33 inches long and 1-1/4 inches
in diameter, suspended 13-1/2 inches from its upper end. Two weights of
4-1/2 lbs. each, made of rolled sheet lead, are provided for this pendulum.
According to the nature of the harmony, one only, or both together below
the suspension, or one above and one below, are used.

The weight of the lower pendulum, or deflector, is supported on a disc,
resting on a pin passing through the bottom of a piece of brass tubing,
which is provided with an eye at its upper end. This eye is connected by a
hook with several strands of silk thread, which are attached to the upper
pendulum by part of a cycle tyre valve. The stem part of the valve was cut
off from the nut, and driven into a suitably sized hole in the end of the
main pendulum. The screw collar for holding the valve in place had a little
brass disc soldered to the outside, and this disc was bored centrally for
the threads to pass through. The edges of the hole had been rounded off
carefully to prevent fraying of the threads. (Fig. 177.) The over-all
length of the pendulum, reckoning from the point of suspension, is 20
inches. The weights of the lower pendulum are several in number, ranging
from l lb. to 3 lbs.

[Illustration: FIG. 177.--Suspension for lower weight of Twin Elliptic
Harmonograph.]

Working the Harmonograph.--A preliminary remark is needed here. Harmonies
are, as we have seen, a question of ratio of swing periods. The larger the
number of swings made by the more quickly moving pendulum relatively to
that of the slower pendulum in a given time, the higher or sharper is the
harmony said to be. Thus, 1:3 is a higher harmony than 1:2, and 2:3 is
lower or flatter than 3:8.

The tuning of a harmonograph with independent pendulums is a simple matter.
It is merely necessary to move weights up or down until the respective
numbers of swings per minute bear to one another the ratio required. This
type of harmonograph, if made of convenient size, has its limitations, as
it is difficult to get as high a harmonic as 1:2, or the octave with it,
owing to the fact that one pendulum must in this case be very much shorter
than the other, and therefore is very sensitive to the effects of friction.

[Illustration: FIG. 176a.--Hamonograms illustrating the ratio 1:3. The
two on the left are made by the pendulums of a twin elliptical harmonograph
when working concurrently; the three on the right by the pendulums when
working antagonistically.]

[Illustration: FIG. 177a.--Harmonograms of 3:4 ratio (antagonistically).
(Reproduced with kind permission of Mr. C. E. Benham.)]

The action of the Twin Elliptic Pendulum is more complicated than that of
the Rectilinear, as the harmony ratio is not between the swings of
deflector and upper pendulum, but rather between the swings of the
deflector and that of the system as a whole. Consequently "tuning" is a
matter, not of timing, but of experiment.

Assuming that the length of the deflector is kept constant--and in practice
this is found to be convenient--the ratios can be altered by altering the
weights of one or both pendulums and by adjustment of the upper weight.

For the upper harmonies, 1:4 down to 3:8, the two pendulums may be almost
equally weighted, the top one somewhat more heavily than the other. The
upper weight is brought down the rod as the ratio is lowered.

To continue the harmonies beyond, say, 2:5, it is necessary to load the
upper pendulum more heavily, and to lighten the lower one so that the
proportionate weights are 5 or 6:1. Starting again with the upper weight
high on the rod, several more harmonies may be established, perhaps down to
4:7. Then a third alteration of the weights is needed, the lower being
reduced to about one-twentieth of the upper, and the upper weight is once
more gradually brought down the rod.

Exact figures are not given, as much depends on the proportions of the
apparatus, and the experimenter must find out for himself the exact
position of the main weight which gives any desired harmonic. A few general
remarks on the action and working of the Twin Elliptic will, however, be
useful.

1. Every ratio has two forms.

(a) If the pendulums are working against each other--
antagonistically--there will be loops or points on the outside of the
figure equal in number to the sum of the figures in the ratio.

(b) If the pendulums are working with each other--concurrently--the loops
form inside the figure, and are equal in number to the difference between
the figures of the ratio. To take the 1:3 ratio as an example. If the
tracing has 3+1=4 loops on the outside, it is a specimen of antagonistic
rotation. If, on the other hand, there are 3-1=2 loops on the inside, it
is a case of concurrent rotation. (Fig. 176, A.)

2. Figures with a ratio of which the sum of the numbers composing it is an
even number (examples, 1:3, 3:5, 3:7) are symmetrical, one half of the
figure reproducing the other. If the sum is Uneven, as in 1:2, 2:3, 2:7,
the figure is unsymmetrical. (Fig. 177, A.)

3. The ratio 1:3 is the easiest to begin upon, so the experimenter's first
efforts may be directed to it. He should watch the growth of the figure
closely, and note whether the repeat line is made in front of or behind the
previous line of the same loop. In the first case the figure is too flat,
and the weight of the upper pendulum must be raised; in the second case the
weight must be lowered. Immediately an exact harmonic is found, the
position of the weight should be recorded.

Interesting effects are obtained by removing the lower pendulum and
allowing the apparatus to describe two elliptical figures successively, one
on the top of the other, on the same card. The crossing of the lines gives
a  "watered silk" appearance to the design, which, if the pen is a very
fine one and the lines very close together, is in many cases very
beautiful.

Readers who wish for further information on this fascinating subject are
recommended to purchase "Harmonic Vibrations," published by Messrs. Newton
and Co., 72 Wigmore Street, London, W. This book, to which I am much
indebted, contains, besides much practical instruction, a number of
charming reproductions of harmonograms.

Before closing this chapter I should like to acknowledge the kind
assistance given me by Mr. C. E. Benham, who has made a long and careful
study of the harmonograph.



XXXII. A SELF-SUPPLYING MATCHBOX.

This useful little article can be constructed in a couple of hours by a
handy person. In general idea it consists of a diamond-shaped box to hold
vestas, working up and down diagonally on a vertical member (A in Fig. 179
(1)), which passes through slits at the top and bottom, and runs in grooves
cut in the sides of the box. The top of A is grooved to allow a match to
rest on it. When the box is drawn up to the full extent allowed by a
transverse pin in the slot shown in Fig. 179 (2), the groove is at the
lowest point of the box, and is covered by the matches. When the box is
lowered, A catches a vesta and takes it up through the top, as seen in Fig.
178, for removal by the fingers.

The only materials required are a cigar-box, some pins, and a supply of
glue. The box should be carefully taken to pieces, and the parts soaked in
hot water till freed of all paper, and then allowed to dry under pressure,
small slips of wood being interposed across the grain to keep them separate
and permit the passage of air.

[Illustration: FIG. 178.--Self-supplying matchbox, with match in position
for removal by fingers.]

When the wood is dry, cut out with a fret saw two pieces shaped like Fig.
179 (3), to form the ends of the box. Allow a little surplus, so that the
edges may be finished off neatly with chisel and plane. The two ends should
match exactly, or there will be trouble at a later stage.

Now cut, down the centre of each a groove for one edge of A to run in. By
preference it should be square; but if you do not possess the necessary
chisel, a V groove made with a knife will suffice--and, of course, in this
case the edges of A will have to be bevelled to fit.

[Illustration: FIG. 179.--Details of self suplying matchbox.]

The four sides of the box, BB and CC, are next cut out. Their sectional
shape is shown in Fig. 179 (1). They should be rather longer than the
length of the ordinary vesta, and all of exactly the same length, and
rectangular. A very small hack saw (costing about 1s.) with fine teeth is
the best possible tool for close cutting, and a small 1 shilling iron plane is
invaluable for truing and bevelling the edges.

The glue pot, which we will assume to be ready for use, is now needed to
attach the fixed B (the other B is hinged to form a lid for filling the box
through) and CC to the ends. This operation must be carried out accurately,
so that the slots may not be blocked.

While the glue is setting, cut out A, allowing an extra 1/16 inch of width
for fitting. The slot down the centre is best made with a fret saw, and
should be smoothed internally by drawing a strip of fine glass paper to and
fro through it. The length of the slot is of great importance. It must
reach to just that distance from the top edge which brings that edge flush
with the bottom of the box when the box is raised; and in the other
direction must permit the box to settle on to its foot, so that the match
lifted shall project above the box.

Work the edges of A down carefully (double-bevelling them if the notches
are V-shaped) till A will run easily, but not loosely, in the box. Then
cut out two slips, DD, and bevel them at the top to an angle of 45 degrees.
Put A in place and glue them on, taking care that the glue does not hold
them fast to A.

Pierce a small hole through DD, in line with the slot, and insert a pin.
Draw the box fully up, and see if the top of A sinks to the proper place.
If it projects a little, lengthen the slot a trifle.

Cut out the supports EE, finish them neatly, and glue them to A. Make sure
that the pin lets the box touch them.

Fix on the lid B with two pins for pivots, and fit a little catch made of
brass wire. To give extra security, drive ordinary pins, cut off to 5/8
inch, through the sides into fixed B, CC, and DD, and through EE into A.
This is an easy enough business if pilot holes are made with a very fine
awl or a tiny drill, and a small, light hammer is used. It now remains only
to go over the whole box with glass paper or emery cloth, and to glue a
diamond of coarse glass paper to one end for striking the matches on.

Note that the lid must not be opened when the box is down, as it would be
wrenched off its pivots.



XXXIII.   A WOODEN WORKBOX.

The box illustrated by Fig. 181 was copied from an article of Norwegian
manufacture. Its construction is an extremely simple matter, provided that
one can get a piece of easily bent wood (birch, for instance), not
exceeding 3/16 inch in thickness, for the sides.

[Illustration: FIG. 180.--Showing how to draw an ellipse.]

[Illustration: FIG. 181.--Norwegian workbox.]

The bottom of the box is made of 5/16 or 3/8 inch wood, cut to an oval or
elliptical shape. To mark out an ellipse about 8 inches long and 5-1/2
inches wide--this will be a. convenient size--stick two pins into the board
5-1/8 inches apart, pass a loop of thread 14 inches in circumference round
these, and run the point of a pencil round the pins in the path which it
has to take when confined by the slack of the loop (Fig. 180). Fret-saw
along the line.

The wood strip for the side is 4-1/2 inches deep, and 1-1/2 inches longer
than the circumference of the bottom. The ends are thinned off somewhat, as
shown in Fig. 181, to prevent the lap having a clumsy appearance, and the
surface is smoothed all over with sandpaper. Bore a number of small nail
holes 3/16 inch from one edge, and then steam the wood over a big saucepan
or other suitable vessel until it is quite lissom.

When attaching the side piece to the bottom, begin at the middle, and work
first towards what will be the inside end of the lap, and then towards the
outside end. Nails are driven in through the holes already drilled. When
nailing is finished, clip the top of the overlap with a hand-vice or screw
spanner, to prevent the tops of the ends sliding over one another, and bore
a line of holes l/4 inch apart, and at the same distance from the outer
end. Fine copper wire drawn to and fro through alternate holes from one end
of the row to the other and back again, will secure the joint.

The lid overlaps the side 1/4 inch in all directions and has a square notch
cut in it at one end to pass under the piece A, and at the other a deeper,
circular-ended nick to enable it to pass over the key B when that is turned
into the position shown in the illustration. A is cut out of 1/4-inch wood;
B, in one piece, out of 1/2-inch. Their length under the heads exceeds the
inside depth of the box by the thickness of the lid.

A is affixed rigidly to the side by small screws or wire, while B must be
attached in a manner, which will allow the head to rotate. Cut two nicks
round the shank, and two horizontal slots at the same height through the
end of the box. A couple of brass rings must then be procured of such a
size that, when flattened into a somewhat oval shape, they will project
beyond the slots sufficiently to allow a piece of wire to pass through them
and prevent their being drawn back again.

Quarter-inch wood will do for the lid. A handle is made out of a couple of
inches of small cane bent into a semicircle, let through the lid at each
end, glued, and cut off flush.

The exterior may be decorated by a design in poker-work, or be stained and
varnished. This is left to the maker's discretion.



XXXIV.  WRESTLING PUPPETS.

[Illustration: FIG. 182.--Peg marked for cutting and drilling.]

The expenditure of a halfpenny, and a quarter of an hour's use of a pocket
knife, bradawl, and pliers, will produce a toy which is warranted to amuse
grown-ups as well as children. Wrestlers made out of clothes pegs may be
bought for a copper or two in the street, and are hardly a novelty; yet a
few notes on home production will not be a waste of space, as making is
cheaper, and much more interesting, than buying.

The clothes pegs used must be of the shape shown in Fig. 182, with a round
top. They cost one penny per dozen.

Drill holes through body and legs as indicated in Fig. 182. Cut the legs
from the "trunk,'" and whittle them to the shape of Fig. 183. The arms,
made out of any thin wood, are 2-1/4 inches long between centres of end
holes.

To get the best results the two arms and the four legs should be paired off
to exactly the same length.

[Illustration: FIG. 183.--Clothes-peg wrestlers.]

The neatest method of attaching the parts is to use small brass tacks,
which must, of course, be of somewhat larger diameter than the holes in the
body. Holes in arms and legs are a loose fit, so that the wrestlers may be
very loose-jointed, and the tacks must not be driven in far enough to cause
any friction.

Instead of tacks one may use wire passed through the parts and secured by
a bend or loop at each end. Wire has the disadvantage of entangling the
thread which works the figures.

When assembling is finished, bore holes in the centres of the arm pieces,
pass a piece of wire through, and twist it into a neat loop at each end. To
one loop tie 2 feet of strong thread (carpet thread is best), and to the
free end of the thread a large nail or hook. The other loop has 6 feet or
so of thread tied to it, to be worked by the hand. If the thread is stained
black, it will be practically invisible by artificial light.

The nail or hook is stuck under the edge of the carpet, or into some crack
or cranny which affords a good hold, and the wrestlers are worked by
motions of the hand. The funniest antics are produced by very slight jerks.

If the arms are set too close together the heads may stick between them, in
which case one must either flatten off the sides of the heads or insert
fresh arm wires of greater length. If a head persists in jamming against
the thread wire or getting under it and staying there, cut 1/2 inch off a
pin and stick it into the front of the crown, so that the head is arrested
by the wire when the wrestler bends forward.

[Illustration: FIG. 184.--Large wrestlers made of stout wood.]

Large Wrestlers.--A more elaborate and realistic pair is shown in Fig.
184. The originals of the sketch are 8 inches high. Half-inch deal was used
for the bodies, 3/8-inch for the legs and arms. The painting-in of hair,
features, tights, and shoes adds considerably to the effect. The heads and
limbs are mere profiles, but anyone with a turn for carving might spend a
little time in rounding off and adding details which will make the puppets
appear more lifelike.



XXXV.   DOUBLE BELLOWS.

The small-sized bellows which have become popular in sitting-rooms are
usually more ornamental than efficient, and make one think regretfully of
the old-fashioned article of ample capacity which is seldom seen nowadays.

Fig. 185 illustrates a method of coupling up two small bellows in such a
manner as to provide an almost continuous blast, besides doubling the
amount of air sent through the fire in a given time, at the coat of but
little extra exertion. A piece of wood half an inch thick is screwed across
one bellows just behind the valve hole. The two bellows are then laid valve
facing valve, and are attached to one another by a strip of tin passed
round the wood just behind the nozzles and by tying the two fixed handles
together.

[Illustration: FIG. 185.--Double-acting bellows. Two methods of coupling
shown.]

Make a rectangle of stout wire somewhat wider than the handles and long
enough to reach from the outer face of one moving handle to that of the
other, when one bellows is quite closed and the other full open. The ends
of the wire should be soldered together, and the ends of the link held up
to the handles by a couple of staples.

An alternative method is to use a piece of wood with a screw driven into it
at right angles near each end through the staples on the handles (Fig. 185,
a). In place of the staples you may use screw-in eyes fitting the screws.



XXXVI.  A HOME-MADE PANTOGRAPH.

The pantograph is a simple apparatus for copying drawings, maps, designs,
etc., on a reduced or enlarged scale, or to the same size as the original.

[Illustration: FIG. 186.--Details of simple pantograph.]

A sketch of a pantograph is given in Fig. 186. Four rods are jointed
together to form a parallelogram, the sides of which can be lengthened or
shortened to suit the scale of reproduction. One is attached by a fixed
pivot at a to the board on which the drawing is done. At b and e are
removable pivots, used for adjusting the rods; at c is a pivot which
projects an inch or so below the rods. The pointer is inserted at d for
enlargement, or at f for reduction, the pencil being in the unoccupied hole
at d or f.

If a same-sized copy is desired, the fixed pivot is transferred to d, and
the pencil and pointer placed at a and f respectively.

Construction of an Enlarging and Reducing Pantograph.--Cut out of
1/8-inch oak, walnut, or beech four rods 5/8 inch wide and 19 inches long.
Smooth them well all over, and make marks near the ends of each, exactly 18
inches apart. The graduation of the rods for the adjustment pivot holes is
carried out in accordance with the measurements given in Fig. 187. It is
advisable to mark out and bore each rod separately if you do not possess a
machine which will drill holes quite perpendicularly; if you do, all four
rods can be drilled at one operation.

In Fig. 187 the lower row of numerals indicates the number of times (in
diameters) the original is enlarged when all four holes similarly figured
are used; the upper row, the size of the copy as compared with the original
in case of reduction.

If proportions other than those given are required, a very little
calculation will locate the necessary holes.

Pivots.--All the pivots must fit their holes accurately, as any looseness
at the joints detracts from the truth of reproduction. For pivots band b
and e may use brass screws and small pieces of hard wood as nuts to hold
them in position. The nuts should screw on rather stiffly, and not be
forced hard against the rods, as free motion with little friction at all
joints is essential for good work.

[Illustration: FIG. 187.--Diagram showing how to mark off pantograph
rods. The dotted lines above rod give distances of holes from ends.]

The fixed pivot at a may be merely the shank of a wire nail of the proper
size driven into the board, a cork collar being slipped over it to keep the
rod the proper distance from the board. For c use a screw to the head of
which has been soldered half an inch of a round-headed brass nail, which
will move easily over the paper. At d is needed a hollow pivot, fashioned
out of a quarter of an inch of pencil-point protector or some other thin
tube, burred over slightly at the ends so as not to fall out. The end of B
at  f  has a slotted hole to grip the pencil or pointer, as the case may
be.

A Same-size Pantograph.--For making a same-size copy, tracing may be
preferred to the use of a pantograph; but if a pantograph is adopted, a
special apparatus may be constructed for the purpose. The arrangement is
exactly the same as that already described, excepting that the only holes
needed are those at a, c, d, f, at the middle points of the four rods, the
parallelogram formed by the rods being equal-sided. The fixed pivot is
situated at d, and pencil and pointer holes are made at a and f.

Using the Pantograph.--When adjusting the instrument for reduction or
enlargement, make sure that the adjustment pivots are in the holes
corresponding with the scale. The fixed pivot, pointer, and pencil must be
rigid, and, with pivot c, be of such a length that the pantograph as a
whole moves parallel to the paper. A little sliding weight to place on the
rod near the pencil will be found useful for keeping the pencil point in
constant contact with the paper.

If the apparatus works stiffly, ease the holes a trifle and lead-pencil
the wood at all points where two surfaces rub. It is absolutely impossible
to make a good reproduction with a stiff, jerky pantograph.

To decide the positions of original and the paper for the copy, get the
pointer centred on the original and adjust the paper till its centre is
under the pencil.



XXXVII.  A SILHOUETTE DRAWING MACHINE.

With this very simple apparatus you will be able to give good entertainment
to such of your friends as may wish to have black paper records of their
faces in profile.

The machine is merely a long rod, with a sliding pencil attached to one end
and a metal pointer stuck into the other, supported near the pencil end on
a pivot which permits free movement in all directions.

For heads and busts only, the rod and pointer combined need not be more
than 4 feet 6 inches long. The rod is a 1/2-inch blind rod, the pointer a
stout knitting-needle driven axially into one end of the rod. This pointer,
being of small diameter, follows the minor curves and angles of the
features much more closely than would be possible with the rod.

The support is a piece of wood, 1-1/2 inches square and 12 to 15 inches
long, screwed on to a large foot, which should be fairly heavy, as any
tilting or slipping will, of course, spoil the silhouette. The universal
joint for the rod is made by soldering a small U-shaped piece of metal to
the end of a short metal bar. The ends of the U are drilled for a pin
passing through the rod; and a hole is sunk into the top of the support to
take the bar. The fit should be close, to prevent the pivot rocking about,
and the hole in the support deep enough to bring the bottom of the stirrup
down against the wood.

If a series of holes half an inch apart is drilled, through the rod, the
nearest 9 inches from the pencil end, the size of the silhouette
proportionately to the original can be varied by moving the pin from one
hole to another.

[Illustration: FIG. 188.--Silhouettograph in use.]

[Illustration: FIG. 188a.--Group of silhouettes drawn with the machine
described.]

The pencil holder is 4 inches of tubing, in which the pencil can slide
easily without shaking. If necessary, the size of the pencil should be
reduced by rubbing with glass paper. Bind the holder tightly to the end of
the rod away from the pointer, so that one extremity just overhangs the
rod. A piece of thin elastic is tied to the unsharpened end of the pencil
and to the pencil tube, the adjustment allowing the pencil to project an
inch when the elastic is taut but not stretched.

A fairly soft pencil and a thick, smooth paper or card give the best
results. Paper should be backed by something hard to prevent the pencil
digging in. Attach the paper to a firm vertical surface, such as the side
of a box, a drawing board, a wall, etc.

Using the Machine.--The rod support, paper, and sitter should be arranged
so that the rod is level at the height of the sitter's nose and the pencil
on the centre of the paper. Bring the support near enough to the paper to
drive the pencil back into the tube until the point projects only half an
inch.

A thread attached to the pencil will enable you to keep the pencil off the
paper until you wish to begin drawing the profile.

Begin with the pointer pressing against the sitter's chest, and bring it
over the face and down the back of the head and neck. Do not press it into
the hair, but carry it along what you consider to be the outline; though it
must be in actual contact with the features and clothes. It is hardly
necessary to mention that the sitter must keep perfectly still if the
silhouette is to be at all accurate.

The tracing is cut round with fine-pointed scissors, and the paper blacked
and stuck on a piece of white card. Some trouble is saved by using paper
white on one aide and black on the other. If duplicates are needed, two or
more pieces of paper should be stuck together by the corners and to the
paper on which the silhouette is drawn, and all be cut through at one
operation.

With a little practice the actual tracing of the outline occupies but a few
seconds. Things are expedited if an assistant adjusts the paper and pencil.



XXXVIII. A SIGNALLING LAMP.

Visual signalling is effected at night in the Morse code by means of a lamp
fitted with an easily-moved shutter, which passes or cuts off the light at
the will of the operator. Readers who know the Morse code might well go to
the trouble of constructing in duplicate the simple apparatus to be
described, as the possession of an outfit will enable them to extend their
signalling capabilities.

The stand for the lamp is admirably supplied by the ordinary camera tripod.
For the illuminant we may select any good acetylene cycle lamp.

For this a holder is made of 1/2-inch wood, according to the sketch shown
in Fig. 189. The width of all the four parts should be about 2 inches
greater than the front glass of the lamp. B and C should be sufficiently
far apart to allow the lamp to rest on the rim above the carbide chamber;
and the front, A, should be at least an inch higher than the top of the
lamp glass.

[Illustration: FIG. 189.--Signalling lamp with quick-moving shutter.]

The hole cut in B must be so situated as to bring the front of the lamp
close to the front of the holder, so that the greatest possible amount of
light may be utilized. The hole in A should be rather larger than the lamp
front, and, of course, be accurately centred. Mark these two holes off
carefully, and cut out with a pad saw or fret saw.

A socket must be attached to the centre of the underside of the base to
take the camera screw; or, if such a socket is not easily obtainable, a
hole should be drilled in the base to take an ordinary wood screw of good
size, the surplus of which is cut off so as not to interfere with the lamp.

The Shutter.--The woodwork is so simple that nothing further need be said
about it. The more difficult part of the business is the making of the
shutter, which must be so constructed that it can be opened and closed
rapidly by motions similar to those used in working the telegraph key
described in a preceding chapter. Speed of working is obtained by dividing
the shutter into two or three parts, each revolving on its own spindle, but
all connected so as to act in perfect unison. The thinnest sheet brass or
iron obtainable should be used, so that the tension of the spring used to
close the shutter need not be great. Our illustration shows a two-part
shutter, each half an inch wider than the hole in the front, and jointly a
similar amount deeper. The upper half overlaps the lower, outside, by a
quarter of an inch.

The spindles are two straight pieces of brass wire, revolving in sockets
which are most easily made of notched pieces of wood (as shown in Fig.
189), with removable caps of strip tin. The lower spindle should be an inch
longer than the width of the front, to allow for a cranked end, to which
the closing spring will be attached.

Having cut out the halves of the shutter, solder the spindle wires to one
edge of each on what will be the back side. The wires must be so arranged
as to allow a quarter of an inch to project beyond the left edge of the
front, as the opening mechanism is situated on this side as the most
convenient for the operator.

Take a couple of metal discs, an inch or so in diameter, and bore a hole in
each near the circumference to fit the ends of the pivots fairly tight.
Three-eighths of an inch from this--centre to centre--bore and tap a hole
for a small screw. The tapping should be done with a taper tap and carried
just so far that the screw turns stiffly without danger of being broken off
by the screw-driver.

Next find the correct positions of the parts of the shutter and the spindle
sockets on the front of the holder, and mark them off carefully. Screw the
wooden parts of the sockets to the front. Four little "distance pieces"
should now be cut out of small tubing, or made by twisting tin round the
spindle, to place on the spindles between shutter and sockets, so that the
shutters cannot shift sideways.

The right-hand end of the lower spindle must be bent over (after slipping
on the distance piece) to form a 1/2-inch crank making an angle of 45
degrees with the line of the front, in an upward direction, as it will be
depressed by the opening of the shutter. Flatten out the end with a hammer,
and drill a small hole near the tip.

The shutters can now be placed in position, and the caps of the sockets be
screwed on. The next thing to make is the connecting rod to join the cranks
at the left side of the front. For this purpose we may use a piece of
fairly stiff strip metal--brass by preference--5 or 6 inches long. Half an
inch from one end make a mark with the centre punch; then measure off
exactly the distance between the shutter spindles, and make a second punch
mark. Drill holes at the marks large enough, for the disc screws to pass
through easily, but not loosely.

Attach the rod to the discs by the screws, and slip the discs on to the
ends of the shutter spindles. (The free end of the rod should be upwards.)
Press the shutters against the front so that they cannot open, adjust the
discs at an angle of 45 degrees to the front in an upward direction, and
solder them firmly to the spindles.

The upper end of the connecting rod should be turned over to form a finger
rest, or be sharpened off to take a knob. The last operation is the fitting
of the spring to close the shutter. A spiral spring attached at one end of
the crank on the lower spindle and at the other to a nail projecting from
the side of the front is the most convenient arrangement. If you have not
got a spiral spring, you can easily make a. fairly efficient substitute out
of hard brass wire wound a few times round a large wire nail.

An alternative method of springing is to add an arm, a, to the connecting
rod, as shown by dotted lines in Fig. 189, and to use the projection for
engaging a spring, made by winding hard brass wire a few times round a
nail. A screw passed through the coil holds it to the front.

The tension of the spring must be just sufficient to close the shutter
smartly and prevent it rebounding far enough to pass any light.



XXXIX. A MINIATURE GASWORKS.

The most primitive method of making coal gas on a small scale is to fill a
tin--which must have folded, not soldered, joints--with small coal, punch a
hole in the bottom, and place it lid downwards in the fire. Gas soon begins
to issue, but, owing to the quantity of moisture and impurities present, it
will not ignite until some minutes have elapsed. The flame, when it does
make its appearance, is very smoky and gives little light, because, in
addition to the coal gas of commerce, there are present ammonia gas,
sulphuretted hydrogen, carbonic acid, tar vapour, etc., which prevent
brightness of flame.

[Illustration: FIG. 190.--General view of gas-making apparatus.]

A miniature gasworks, if it is to be worthy of its name, must obviously
endeavour to separate the troublesome components from the useful gas. The
doing of this involves several processes, all simple enough in principle,
and requiring but simple apparatus for demonstration on a small scale. To
take them in order the processes are--

(l) The formation of gas in a retort;

(2) The condensation of the tar;

(3) The condensation of steam;

(4) The removal of the ammonia gas;

(5) The removal of the sulphuretted hydrogen and carbonic acid.

The last two processes are, in a real gasworks, usually separated, but for
simplicity's sake we will combine them. Finally, the storage of the gas has
to be provided for.

The Retort.--To get very good results, the retort should be of cast iron,
and have a removable air-tight cover; but, to keep down expense, we will
use an ordinary 2-pound self-opening coffee tin. A short piece of brass
pipe is soldered into the lid near one edge to carry off the gas as it is
generated. To get a fairly gas-tight joint, red-leaded asbestos string
should be rammed tightly between the lid and the tin. The tin may be laid
on an open fire on the slant, the lid end uppermost, and the pipe at the
top, where the gas will collect; or, if you wish to make things more
realistic, you may easily construct an oven with sides and back of
fire-brick, and front of sheet iron, through the hole in which the tin is
pushed horizontally, so that only half an inch projects. This is a.
suitable arrangement for out of doors.

[Illustration: FIG. 191.--Vertical section of condenser.]

The Hydraulic Main.--This is represented in Fig. 190 by a double-necked
bottle, B, standing in a bowl of cold water. The pipe from the retort
passes through the cork in one neck and dips half an inch below the surface
of the water inside. The gas, on meeting the water, is cooled, and some of
the steam in it is condensed, also most of the tar present, which floats on
the top of the water. From the bottle the gas passes on to the Condensers,
where the process of cooling is completed gradually. The condenser (Fig.
191) is so designed as to cause the gas to pass through several pipes in
succession. The base consists of a tin box, 6 inches long, 4 wide, and
1-3/4 deep. This is divided longitudinally down the centre by a 1-1/2-inch
partition, soldered to the bottom and sides; and the two divisions are
again subdivided, as shown in Fig. 192, by shorter cross partitions.

[Illustration: FIG. 192.--Plan of condenser.]

For the condensing pipes, "compo" tubing of 1/2-inch outside diameter is
convenient. The amount required will, of  course, depend on the number of
pipes used and the length of the individual pipes. The design shows 6
pipes, each 3 feet long, bent to a semicircular curve (Fig. 191) at the
middle to form very long, narrow horse-shoes. The pipes are supported at
the curve by the crossbar, S (Fig. 191), of a frame, and their ends enter
short pieces of brass tubing soldered into holes in the bottom of the tin
box. Rubber bands make the joints air-tight.

[Illustration: FIG. 193.--Vertical section of purifier.]

The base is stood bottom upwards in a larger tin containing an inch and a
half of water. The water acts as a seal, preventing the passage of the gas
from one compartment to another through the pipes which it traverses, in
the order indicated by the arrows and numbers in Fig. 192, to reach the
outlet. On its way the gas is deprived of any water and of any traces of
tar. The condensed water and tar fall from the open ends of the pipes into
the base.

The Purifier is made of a large tin with overlapping lid. Near the bottom
is soldered on an inlet pipe; just below the lid an outlet pipe. Cut out
two discs of perforated zinc or sheet tin to fit inside the tin easily, but
not loosely. (If tin is used, make a number of small holes in it.) The
lower of the discs (Fig. 193, Bl) has three wire legs, AA, soldered to it,
to support the upper disc, B. Three short supports keep it clear of the
bottom.

The tin must be charged with a mixture of two parts green sulphate of iron
and one part lime. The lime should be slaked a short time before use. The
sulphate, lime, and sufficient water to moisten the whole are ground into a
pulp and left to dry. The dry mixture, which has a reddish-yellow colour,
is broken up fine. Put tray B1 into place and spread half the chemical over
it; then lay B on the top and cover it with the remainder. The lid joint is
sealed by a broad rubber band.

While passing through the tin, the ammonia, sulphuretted hydrogen and
carbonic acid gases all combine with the chemical, and fairly pure gas
issues from the outlet.

The Gasholder.--As the gasometer is an important feature of a gasworks,
our small plant should contain its counterpart, as it serves to regulate
the pressure of the gas, and, therefore, the steadiness of the flame, as
well as affording storage room.

As a gasometer, one may use a container made on the principle of the
lung-testing apparatus described on p. 361; or the gasholder of a lantern
acetylene apparatus, which must, of course, be suitably counterweighted.

Working the Plant.--When starting up the plant, leave the burner open
until inflammable gas issues, so that the air present in the various
chambers may be displaced.

[Transcribers note: Premature lighting of the burner may cause the flame to
propagate into the system and explode. I speak from experience.]


INDEX.

Aeroplane, model, self-launching.
Bedplate for engine.
Bellows, double.
Bench, joiner's.
Benham's harmonograph.
Bicycle shed.
Boilers, model.
Bookstand.
Box kites.

Cabinets, cardboard, cigar-box, match-box, tool.
Circles, rolling.
Clock, electric alarm.
Colour top.
Cylinder, double-acting steam.

Developing sink.
Doors for shed.
Double-acting horizontal steam engine.
Double bellows.

Eccentrics.
Electric alarm clock.
Electric motor, reciprocating.
Electric railway.
Engine, hot-air.
Experiments, apparatus for simple scientific.

Fuels for model boilers.

Gasworks, miniature.
Ganges, rain, water,
Gimbals, or universal joints.
Gliders, paper.
Goold's harmonograph.
Governor for engine.

Harmonographs.
Hot-air engines.
House ladder.

Joiner's bench.

Kettles, quick-boiling.
Kites, box.
Kite winders.

Ladder, house.
Lamp, signalling.
Locomotive, electric.
Lung-testing apparatus.
Magic swingers.
windmill.
Match-boarding.
Match-box, self-supplying.
Morse code.
Morse sounder.
Motor, electric.
Motor, water.

Nozzle for steam turbine.

Pantograph.
Pendulums for harmonograph.
Pens for harmonograph.
Pneumatic puzzle.
Poultry house.
Propellers for aeroplane.
Pumps.
Puppets, wrestling.
Puzzle, pneumatic.

Railway, electric.
Rain gauges.
Reciprocating steam engine, simple.
Resistance, adjustable, for electric railway.
Reversing switch for electric railway.
Riveting.

Safety Valves.
Sawing trestle.
Shed for bicycle.
Signalling lamp.
Silhouette drawing machine.
Simple scientific experiments.
Sink, developing.
Slide valve.
Smoke-ring apparatus.
Soldering.
Spokes, magic.
Steam cocks.
Steam engines.
Steam gauge.
Steam pump.
Steam tops.
Steam turbines.
Strength. testing machines.
Swingers, magic.
Switch, multiple battery.
Switch, reversing.

Target apparatus.
Telegraphic apparatus.
Testing boilers.
Tool cabinet.
Top, colour.
Tops, steam.
Track for model railway.
Trestle, sawing.
Turbines, model steam.

Vanishing spiral.
Vice for Joiner's bench.

Water gauge.
Water motor.
Weights for harmonograph pendulums.
Windmill, magic.
Wind vanes; electric.
Workbox, Norwegian.
Wrestling puppets.
Wriggling line.


THE END.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE PRESS OF THE PUBLISHERS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Things To Make, by Archibald Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THINGS TO MAKE ***

***** This file should be named 14664.txt or 14664.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/6/6/14664/

Produced by Don Kostuch

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Project Gutenberg's Bookbinding, and the Care of Books, by Douglas Cockerell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Bookbinding, and the Care of Books
       A handbook for Amateurs, Bookbinders & Librarians

Author: Douglas Cockerell

Editor: W. R. Lethaby

Illustrator: Noel Rooke

Release Date: September 19, 2008 [EBook #26672]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOKBINDING, AND THE CARE OF BOOKS ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Irma Spehar and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                      THE ARTISTIC CRAFTS SERIES
                        OF TECHNICAL HANDBOOKS
                        EDITED BY W. R. LETHABY

                              BOOKBINDING

            [Illustration: WHITE PIGSKIN.--_Basle_, 1512.]




                           BOOKBINDING, AND
                           THE CARE OF BOOKS

                        A HANDBOOK FOR AMATEURS
                       BOOKBINDERS & LIBRARIANS
                         BY DOUGLAS COCKERELL

                                 WITH

                        DRAWINGS BY NOEL ROOKE
                        AND OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS


                            [Illustration]


                               NEW YORK
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                                 1910


                           COPYRIGHT, 1901,
                      BY D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

                         _All rights reserved_




                           EDITOR'S PREFACE


In issuing this volume of a series of Handbooks on the Artistic
Crafts, it will be well to state what are our general aims.

In the first place, we wish to provide trustworthy text-books of
workshop practice, from the points of view of experts who have
critically examined the methods current in the shops, and putting
aside vain survivals, are prepared to say what is good workmanship,
and to set up a standard of quality in the crafts which are more
especially associated with design. Secondly, in doing this, we hope to
treat design itself as an essential part of good workmanship. During
the last century most of the arts, save painting and sculpture of an
academic kind, were little considered, and there was a tendency to
look on "design" as a mere matter of _appearance_. Such
"ornamentation" as there was was usually obtained by following in a
mechanical way a drawing provided by an artist who often knew little
of the technical processes involved in production. With the critical
attention given to the crafts by Ruskin and Morris, it came to be seen
that it was impossible to detach design from craft in this way, and
that, in the widest sense, true design is an inseparable element of
good quality, involving as it does the selection of good and suitable
material, contrivance for special purpose, expert workmanship, proper
finish and so on, far more than mere ornament, and indeed, that
ornamentation itself was rather an exuberance of fine workmanship than
a matter of merely abstract lines. Workmanship when separated by too
wide a gulf from fresh thought--that is, from design--inevitably
decays, and, on the other hand, ornamentation, divorced from
workmanship, is necessarily unreal, and quickly falls into
affectation. Proper ornamentation may be defined as a language
addressed to the eye; it is pleasant thought expressed in the speech
of the tool.

In the third place, we would have this series put artistic
craftsmanship before people as furnishing reasonable occupation for
those who would gain a livelihood. Although within the bounds of
academic art, the competition, of its kind, is so acute that only a
very few per cent. can fairly hope to succeed as painters and
sculptors; yet, as artistic craftsmen, there is every probability that
nearly every one who would pass through a sufficient period of
apprenticeship to workmanship and design would reach a measure of
success.

In the blending of handwork and thought in such arts as we propose to
deal with, happy careers may be found as far removed from the dreary
routine of hack labour, as from the terrible uncertainty of academic
art. It is desirable in every way that men of good education should be
brought back into the productive crafts: there are more than enough of
us "in the city," and it is probable that more consideration will be
given in this century than in the last to Design and Workmanship.

                                                   W. R. LETHABY.




                             AUTHOR'S NOTE


It is hoped that this book will help bookbinders and librarians to
select sound methods of binding books.

It is intended to supplement and not to supplant workshop training for
bookbinders. No one can become a skilled workman by reading
text-books, but to a man who has acquired skill and practical
experience, a text-book, giving perhaps different methods from those
to which he has been accustomed, may be helpful.

My thanks are due to many friends, including the workmen in my
workshop, for useful suggestions and other help, and to the Society of
Arts for permission to quote from the report of their Special
Committee on leather for bookbinding.

I should also like to express my indebtedness to my master, Mr. T. J.
Cobden-Sanderson, for it was in his workshop that I learned my craft,
and anything that may be of value in this book is due to his
influence.

                                                            D. C.

  _November_ 1901.




                               CONTENTS


                                PART I

                               _BINDING_

                                                                   PAGE

Editor's Preface                                                     7

Author's Note                                                       11


                               CHAPTER I

Introduction                                                        17


                              CHAPTER II

Entering--Books in Sheets--Folding--Collating--Pulling
to Pieces--Refolding--Knocking out Joints                           33


                              CHAPTER III

Guarding--Throwing Out--Paring Paper--Soaking off India
Proofs--Mounting very Thin Paper--Splitting
Paper--Inlaying--Flattening Vellum                                  53


                              CHAPTER IV

Sizing--Washing--Mending                                            67


                               CHAPTER V

End Papers--Leather Joints--Pressing                                80


                              CHAPTER VI

Trimming Edges before Sewing--Edge Gilding                          92


                              CHAPTER VII

Marking up--Sewing--Materials for Sewing                            98


                             CHAPTER VIII

Fraying out Slips--Glueing up--Rounding and Backing                114


                              CHAPTER IX

Cutting and Attaching Boards--Cleaning off Back--Pressing          124


                               CHAPTER X

Cutting in Boards--Gilding and Colouring Edges                     139


                              CHAPTER XI

Headbanding                                                        147


                              CHAPTER XII

Preparing for Covering--Paring Leather--Covering--Mitring
Corners--Filling-in Boards                                         152


                             CHAPTER XIII

Library Binding--Binding very Thin Books--Scrap-Books--Binding
in Vellum--Books covered with Embroidery                           173


                              CHAPTER XIV

Decoration--Tools--Finishing--Tooling on Vellum--Inlaying
on Leather                                                         188


                              CHAPTER XV

Lettering--Blind Tooling--Heraldic Ornament                        215


                              CHAPTER XVI

Designing for Gold-Tooled Decoration                               230


                             CHAPTER XVII

Pasting down End Papers--Opening Books                             254


                             CHAPTER XVIII

Clasps and Ties--Metal on Bindings                                 259


                              CHAPTER XIX

Leather                                                            263


                              CHAPTER XX

Paper--Pastes--Glue                                                280


                                PART II

                      _CARE OF BOOKS WHEN BOUND_


                              CHAPTER XXI

Injurious Influences to which Books are Subjected                  291


                             CHAPTER XXII

To Preserve Old Bindings--Re-backing                               302

SPECIFICATIONS                                                     307

GLOSSARY                                                           313

REPRODUCTIONS OF BINDINGS (Eight Collotypes)                       319

INDEX                                                              337




                                PART I

                                BINDING




                               CHAPTER I

                             INTRODUCTION


The reasons for binding the leaves of a book are to keep them together
in their proper order, and to protect them. That bindings can be made,
that will adequately protect books, can be seen from the large number
of fifteenth and sixteenth century bindings now existing on books
still in excellent condition. That bindings are made, that fail to
protect books, may be seen by visiting any large library, when it will
be found that many bindings have their boards loose and the leather
crumbling to dust. Nearly all librarians complain, that they have to
be continually rebinding books, and this not after four hundred, but
after only five or ten years.

It is no exaggeration to say that ninety per cent. of the books bound
in leather during the last thirty years will need rebinding during the
next thirty. The immense expense involved must be a very serious drag
on the usefulness of libraries; and as rebinding is always to some
extent damaging to the leaves of a book, it is not only on account of
the expense that the necessity for it is to be regretted.

The reasons that have led to the production in modern times of
bindings that fail to last for a reasonable time, are twofold. The
materials are badly selected or prepared, and the method of binding is
faulty. Another factor in the decay of bindings, both old and new, is
the bad conditions under which they are often kept.

The object of this text-book is to describe the best methods of
bookbinding, and of keeping books when bound, taking into account the
present-day conditions. No attempt has been made to describe all
possible methods, but only such as appear to have answered best on old
books. The methods described are for binding that can be done by hand
with the aid of simple appliances. Large editions of books are now
bound, or rather cased, at an almost incredible speed by the aid of
machinery, but all work that needs personal care and thought on each
book, is still done, and probably always will be done, by hand.
Elaborate machinery can only be economically employed when very large
numbers of books have to be turned out exactly alike.

The ordinary cloth "binding" of the trade, is better described as
casing. The methods being different, it is convenient to distinguish
between casing and binding. In binding, the slips are firmly attached
to the boards before covering; in casing, the boards are covered
separately, and afterwards glued on to the book. Very great efforts
have been made in the decoration of cloth covers, and it is a pity
that the methods of construction have not been equally considered. If
cloth cases are to be looked upon as a temporary binding, then it
seems a pity to waste so much trouble on their decoration; and if they
are to be looked upon as permanent binding, it is a pity the
construction is not better.

For books of only temporary interest, the usual cloth cases answer
well enough; but for books expected to have permanent value, some
change is desirable.

Valuable books should either be issued in bindings that are obviously
temporary, or else in bindings that are strong enough to be considered
permanent. The usual cloth case fails as a temporary binding, because
the methods employed result in serious damage to the sections of the
book, often unfitting them for rebinding, and it fails as a permanent
binding on account of the absence of sound construction.

In a temporary publisher's binding, nothing should be done to the
sections of a book that would injure them. Plates should be guarded,
the sewing should be on tapes, without splitting the head and tail, or
"sawing in" the backs, of the sections; the backs should be glued up
square without backing. The case may be attached, as is now usual. For
a permanent publisher's binding, something like that recommended for
libraries (page 173) is suggested, with either leather or cloth on the
back.

At the end of the book four specifications are given (page 307). The
first is suggested for binding books of special interest or value,
where no restriction as to price is made. A binding under this
specification may be decorated to any extent that the nature of the
book justifies. The second is for good binding, for books of reference
and other heavy books that may have a great deal of wear. All the
features of the first that make for the strength of the binding are
retained, while those less essential, that only add to the appearance,
are omitted. Although the binding under this specification would be
much cheaper than that carried out under the first, it would still be
too expensive for the majority of books in most libraries; and as it
would seem to be impossible to further modify this form of binding,
without materially reducing its strength, for cheaper work, a somewhat
different system is recommended. The third specification is
recommended for the binding of the general run of small books in most
libraries. The fourth is a modification of this for pamphlets and
other books of little value, that need to be kept together tidily for
occasional reference.

Thanks, in a great measure, to the work of Mr. Cobden-Sanderson,
there is in England the germ of a sound tradition for the best
binding. The Report of the Committee appointed by the Society of Arts
to investigate the cause of the decay of modern leather bindings,
should tend to establish a sound tradition for cheaper work. The third
specification at the end of this book is practically the same as that
given in their Report, and was arrived at by selection, after many
libraries had been examined, and many forms of binding compared.

Up to the end of the eighteenth century the traditional methods of
binding books had altered very little during three hundred years.
Books were generally sewn round five cords, the ends of all of these
laced into the boards, and the leather attached directly to the back.
At the end of the eighteenth century it became customary to pare down
leather until it was as thin as paper, and soon afterwards the use of
hollow backs and false bands became general, and these two things
together mark the beginning of the modern degradation of binding, so
far as its utility as a protection is concerned.

The Society of Arts Committee report that the bookbinders must share
with the leather manufacturers and librarians the blame for the
premature decay of modern bindings, because--

"1. Books are sewn on too few, and too thin cords, and the slips are
pared down unduly (for the sake of neatness), and are not in all cases
firmly laced into the boards. This renders the attachment of the
boards to the book almost entirely dependent on the strength of the
leather.

"2. The use of hollow backs throws all the strain of opening and
shutting on the joints, and renders the back liable to come right off
if the book is much used.

"3. The leather of the back is apt to become torn through the use of
insufficiently strong headbands, which are unable to stand the strain
of the book being taken from the shelf.

"4. It is a common practice to use far too thin leather; especially to
use large thick skins very much pared down for small books.

"5. The leather is often made very wet and stretched a great deal in
covering, with the result that on drying it is further strained,
almost to breaking point, by contraction, leaving a very small margin
of strength to meet the accidents of use."

The history of the general introduction of hollow backs is probably
somewhat as follows: Leather was doubtless first chosen for covering
the backs of books because of its toughness and flexibility; because,
while protecting the back, it would bend when the book was opened and
allow the back to "throw up" (see fig. 1, A). When gold tooling became
common, and the backs of books were elaborately decorated, it was
found that the creasing of the leather injured the brightness or the
gold and caused it to crack. To avoid this the binders lined up the
back until it was as stiff as a block of wood. The back would then not
"throw up" as the book was opened, the leather would not be creased,
and the gold would remain uninjured (see fig. 1, B). This was all very
well for the gold, but a book so treated does not open fully, and
indeed, if the paper is stiff, can hardly be got to open at all. To
overcome both difficulties the hollow back was introduced, and as
projecting bands would have been in the way, the sewing cord was sunk
in saw cuts made across the back of the book.

    [Illustration: FIG. 1.]

The use of hollow backs was a very ingenious way out of the
difficulty, as with them the backs could be made to "throw up," and at
the same time the leather was not disturbed (see fig. 1, C). The
method of "sawing in" bands was known for a long time before the
general use of hollow backs. It has been used to avoid the raised
bands on books covered with embroidered material.

If a book is sewn on tapes, and the back lined with leather, there is
no serious objection to a carefully-made hollow back without bands.
The vellum binders use hollow backs made in this way for great account
books that stand an immense amount of wear. They make the "hollow"
very stiff, so that it acts as a spring to throw the back up.

But although, if carefully done, satisfactory bindings may be made
with hollow backs, their use has resulted in the production of
worthless bindings with little strength, and yet with the appearance
of better work.

The public having been accustomed to raised bands on the backs of
books, and the real bands being sunk in the back, the binders put
false ones over the "hollow." To save money or trouble, the bands
being out of sight, the book would be sewn on only three or sometimes
only two cords, the usual five false ones still showing at the back.
Often only two out of the three bands would be laced into the board,
and sometimes the slips would not be laced in at all. Again, false
headbands worked by the yard by machinery would be stuck on at the
head and tail, and a "hollow" made with brown paper. Then leather so
thin as to have but little strength, but used because it is easy to
work and needs no paring, would be stuck on. The back would often be
full gilt and lettered, and the sides sprinkled or marbled, thus
further damaging the leather.

In every large library hundreds of books bound somewhat on these lines
may be seen. When they are received from the binder they have the
appearance of being well bound, they look smart on the shelf, but in a
few years, whether they are used or not, the leather will have
perished and the boards become detached, and they will have to be
rebound.

As long as librarians expect the appearance of a guinea binding for
two or three shillings, such shams will be produced. The librarian
generally gets his money's worth, for it would be impossible for the
binder to do better work at the price usually paid without materially
altering the appearance of the binding. The polished calf and
imitation crushed morocco must go, and in its place a rougher,
thicker leather must be employed. The full-gilt backs must go, the
coloured lettering panel must go, the hollow backs must go, but in the
place of these we may have the books sewn on tapes with the ends
securely fastened into split boards, and the thick leather attached
directly to the backs of the sections. (See specification III. page
307.)

Such a binding would look well and not be more expensive than the
usual library binding. It should allow the book to open flat, and if
the materials are well selected, be very durable, and specially strong
in the joints, the weak place in most bindings. The lettering on the
back may be damaged in time if the book is much used, but if so it can
easily be renewed at a fraction of the cost of rebinding, and without
injury to the book.

While the majority of books in most libraries must be bound at a small
cost, at most not exceeding a few shillings a volume, there is a large
demand for good plain bindings, and a limited, but growing, demand for
more or less decorated bindings for special books.

Any decoration but the simplest should be restricted to books bound as
well as the binder can do them. The presence of decoration should be
evidence that the binder, after doing his best with the "forwarding,"
has had time in which to try to make his work a beautiful, as well as
a serviceable, production.

Many books, although well bound, are better left plain, or with only a
little decoration. But occasionally there are books that the binder
can decorate as lavishly as he is able. As an instance of bindings
that cannot be over-decorated, those books which are used in important
ceremonies, such as Altar Books, may be mentioned. Such books may be
decorated with gold and colour until they seem to be covered in a
golden material. They will be but spots of gorgeousness in a great
church or cathedral, and they cannot be said to be over-decorated as
long as the decoration is good.

So, occasionally some one may have a book to which he is for some
reason greatly attached, and wishing to enshrine it, give the binder a
free hand to do his best with it. The binder may wish to make a
delicate pattern with nicely-balanced spots of ornament, leaving the
leather for the most part bare, or he may wish to cover the outside
with some close gold-tooled pattern, giving a richness of texture
hardly to be got by other means. If he decides on the latter, many
people will say that the cover is over-decorated. But as a book cover
can never be seen absolutely alone, it should not be judged as an
isolated thing covered with ornament without relief, but as a spot of
brightness and interest among its surroundings. If a room and
everything in it is covered with elaborate pattern, then anything with
a plain surface would be welcome as a relief; but in a room which is
reasonably free from ornament, a spot of rich decoration should be
welcome.

It is not contended that the only, or necessarily the best, method of
decorating book covers is by elaborate all-over gold-tooled pattern;
but it is contended that this is a legitimate method of decoration for
exceptional books, and that by its use it is possible to get a
beautiful effect well worth the trouble and expense involved.

Good leather has a beautiful surface, and may sometimes be got of a
fine colour. The binder may often wish to show this surface and
colour, and to restrict his decoration to small portions of the
cover, and this quite rightly, he aiming at, and getting, a totally
different effect than that got by all-over patterns. Both methods are
right if well done, and both methods can equally be vulgarised if
badly done.

A much debated question is, how far the decoration of a binding should
be influenced by the contents of the book? A certain appropriateness
there should be, but as a general thing, if the binder aims at making
the cover beautiful, that is the best he can do. The hints given for
designing are not intended to stop the development of the student's
own ideas, but only to encourage their development on right lines.

There should be a certain similarity of treatment between the general
get-up of a book and its binding. It is a great pity that printers and
binders have drifted so far apart; they are, or should be, working for
one end, the production of a book, and some unity of aim should be
evident in the work of the two.

The binding of manuscripts and early printed books should be strong
and simple. It should be as strong and durable as the original old
bindings, and, like them, last with reasonable care for four hundred
years or more. To this end the old bindings, with their stout sewing
cord, wooden boards, and clasps, may be taken as models.

The question is constantly asked, especially by women, if a living can
be made by setting up as bookbinders. Cheap binding can most
economically be done in large workshops, but probably the best
bindings can be done more satisfactorily by binders working alone, or
in very small workshops.

If any one intends to set up as a bookbinder, doing all the work
without help, it is necessary to charge very high prices to get any
adequate return after the working expenses have been paid. In order to
get high prices, the standard of work must be very high; and in order
to attain a high enough standard of work, a very thorough training is
necessary. It is desirable that any one hoping to make money at the
craft should have at least a year's training in a workshop where good
work is done, and after that, some time will be spent before quite
satisfactory work can be turned out rapidly enough to pay, supposing
that orders can be obtained or the books bound can be sold.

There are some successful binders who have had less than a year's
training, but they are exceptional. Those who have not been accustomed
to manual work have usually, in addition to the necessary skill, to
acquire the habit of continuous work. Bookbinding seems to offer an
opening for well-educated youths who are willing to serve an
apprenticeship in a good shop, and who have some small amount of
capital at their command.

In addition to the production of decorated bindings, there is much to
be done by specialising in certain kinds of work requiring special
knowledge. Repairing and binding early printed books and manuscripts,
or the restoration of Parish Registers and Accounts, may be suggested.




                              CHAPTER II

       Entering--Books in Sheets--Folding--Collating--Pulling to
                Pieces--Refolding--Knocking out Joints


                               ENTERING

On receiving a book for binding, its title should be entered in a book
kept for that purpose, with the date of entry, and customer's name
and address, and any instructions he may have given, written out in
full underneath, leaving room below to enter the time taken on the
various operations and cost of the materials used. It is well to
number the entry, and to give a corresponding number to the book. It
should be at once collated, and any special features noted, such as
pages that need washing or mending. If the book should prove to be
imperfect, or to have any serious defect, the owner should be
communicated with, before it is pulled to pieces. This is very
important, as imperfect books that have been "pulled" are not
returnable to the bookseller. Should defects only be discovered after
the book has been taken to pieces, the bookbinder is liable to be
blamed for the loss of any missing leaves.


                            BOOKS IN SHEETS

The sheets of a newly printed book are arranged in piles in the
printer's warehouse, each pile being made up of repetitions of the
same sheet or "signature." Plates or maps are in piles by themselves
To make a complete book one sheet is gathered from each pile,
beginning at the last sheet and working backwards to signature A. When
a book is ordered from a publisher in sheets, it is such a "gathered"
copy that the binder receives. Some books are printed "double," that
is, the type is set up twice, two copies are printed at once at
different ends of a sheet of paper, and the sheets have to be divided
down the middle before the copies can be separated. Sometimes the
title and introduction, or perhaps only the last sheet, will be
printed in this way. Publishers usually decline to supply in sheets
fewer than two copies of such double-printed books.

If a book is received unfolded, it is generally advisable at once to
fold up the sheets and put them in their proper order, with
half-title, title, introduction, &c., and, if there are plates, to
compare them with the printed list.

Should there be in a recently published book defects of any kind, such
as soiled sheets, the publisher will usually replace them on
application, although they sometimes take a long time to do so. Such
sheets are called "imperfections," and the printers usually keep a
number of "overs" in order to make good such imperfections as may
occur.


                                FOLDING

Books received in sheets must be folded. Folding requires care, or the
margins of different leaves will be unequal, and the lines of printing
not at right angles to the back.

Books of various sizes are known as "folio," "quarto," "octavo,"
"duodecimo," &c. These names signify the number of folds, and
consequently the number of leaves the paper has been folded into.
Thus, a folio is made up of sheets of paper folded once down the
centre, forming two leaves and four pages. The sheets of a quarto have
a second fold, making four leaves and eight pages, and in an octavo
the sheet has a third fold, forming eight leaves and sixteen pages
(see fig. 2), and so on. Each sheet of paper when folded constitutes a
section, except in the case of folios, where it is usual to make up
the sections by inserting two or more sheets, one within the other.

Paper is made in several named sizes, such as "imperial," "royal,"
"demy," "crown," "foolscap," &c. (see p. 283), so that the terms
"imperial folio" or "crown octavo" imply that a sheet of a definite
size has been folded a definite number of times.

    [Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Besides the traditional sizes, paper is now made of almost any length
and width, resulting in books of odd shape, and the names folio,
quarto, &c., are rather losing their true meaning, and are often used
loosely to signify pages of certain sizes, irrespective of the number
that go to a sheet.

On receipt, for instance, of an octavo book for folding, the pile of
sheets is laid flat on the table, and collated by the letter or
signature of each sheet. The first sheet of the book proper will
probably be signature B, as signature A usually consists of the
half-title, title, introduction, &c., and often has to be folded up
rather differently.

The "outer" sides, known by the signature letters B, C, D, &c., should
be downwards, and the inner sides facing upwards with the second
signatures, if there are any, B2, C2, D2, &c., at the right-hand
bottom corner.

The pages of an octave book, commencing at page 1, are shown at fig.
3. A folder is taken in the right hand, and held at the bottom of the
sheet at about the centre, and the sheet taken by the left hand at the
top right-hand corner and bent over until pages 3 and 6 come exactly
over pages 2 and 7; and when it is seen that the headlines and figures
exactly match, the paper, while being held in that position, is
creased down the centre with the folder, and the fold cut up a little
more than half-way. Pages 4, 13, 5, 12 will now be uppermost; pages 12
and 5 are now folded over to exactly match pages 13 and 4, and the
fold creased and cut up a little more than half-way, as before. Pages
8 and 9 will now be uppermost, and will merely require folding
together to make the pages of the section follow in their proper
order. If the folding has been done carefully, and the "register" of
the printing is good, the headlines should be exactly even throughout.

    [Illustration: FIG. 3.]

The object of cutting past the centre at each fold is to avoid the
unsightly creasing that results from folding two or more thicknesses
of paper when joined at the top edge.

A "duodecimo" sheet has the pages arranged as at fig. 4.

The "inset" pages, 10, 15, 14, 11, must be cut off, and the rest of
the section folded as for an octavo sheet. The inset is folded
separately and inserted into the centre of the octavo portion.

Other sizes are folded in much the same way, and the principle of
folding one sheet having been mastered, no difficulty will be found in
folding any other.

Plates often require trimming, and this must be done with judgment.
The plates should be trimmed to correspond as far as possible with the
printing on the opposite page, but if this cannot be done, it is
desirable that something approaching the proportion of margin shown at
fig. 2 (folio) should be aimed at. That is to say, the back margin
should be the smallest, the head margin the next, the fore-edge a
little wider, and the tail widest of all. When a plate consists of a
small portrait or diagram in the centre of the page, it looks better
if it is put a little higher and a little nearer the back than the
actual centre.

    [Illustration: FIG. 4.]

Plates that have no numbers on them must be put in order by the list
of printed plates, or "instructions to the binder." The half-title,
title, dedication, &c., will often be found to be printed on odd
sheets that have to be made up into section A. This preliminary matter
is usually placed in the following order: Half-title, title,
dedication, preface, contents, list of illustrations or other lists.
If there is an index, it should be put at the end of the book.

All plates should be "guarded," and any "quarter sections," that is,
sections consisting of two leaves, should have their backs
strengthened by a "guard," or they may very easily be torn in the
sewing. Odd, single leaves may be guarded round sections in the same
way as plates.

When a book has been folded, it should be pressed (see p. 87).

There will sometimes be pages marked by the printer with a star. These
have some error in them, and are intended to be cut out. The printer
should supply corrected pages to replace them.


                               COLLATING

In addition to the pagination each sheet or section of a printed book
is lettered or numbered. Each letter or number is called the "sheet's
signature." Printers usually leave out J W and V in lettering sheets.
If there are more sections than there are letters in the alphabet, the
printer doubles the letters, signing the sections A A, B B, and so on,
after the single letters are exhausted. Some printers use an Arabic
numeral before the section number to denote the second alphabet, as
2A, 2B, &c., and others change the character of the letters, perhaps
using capitals for the first alphabet and italics for the second. If
the sheets are numbered, the numbers will of course follow
consecutively. In books of more than one volume, the number of the
volume is sometimes added in Roman numerals before the signature, as
II A, II B.

The main pagination of the book usually commences with Chapter I., and
all before that is independently paged in Roman numerals. It is
unusual to have actual numbers on the title or half-title, but if the
pages are counted back from where the first numeral occurs, they
should come right.

There will sometimes be one or more blank leaves completing sections
at the beginning or end. Such blank leaves must be retained, as
without them the volume would be "imperfect."

To collate a modern book the paging must be examined to see that the
leaves are in order, and that nothing is defective or missing.

The method of doing this is to insert the first finger of the right
hand at the bottom of about the fiftieth page, crook the finger, and
turn up the corners of the pages with it. When this is done the thumb
is placed on page 1, and the hand twisted, so as to fan out the top of
the pages. They can then be readily turned over by the thumb and first
finger of the left hand (see fig. 5). This is repeated throughout the
book, taking about fifty pages at a time. It will of course only be
necessary to check the odd numbers, as if they are right, the even
ones on the other side of the leaf must be so. If the pages are
numbered at the foot, the leaves must be fanned out from the head.

    [Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Plates or maps that are not paged can only be checked from the printed
list. When checked it will save time if the number of the page which
each faces is marked on the back in small pencil figures.

In the case of early printed books or manuscripts, which are often not
paged, special knowledge is needed for their collation. It may roughly
be said, that if the sections are all complete, that is, if there are
the same number of leaves at each side of the sewing in all the
sections, the book may be taken to be perfect, unless of course whole
sections are missing. All unpaged books should be paged through in
pencil before they are taken apart; this is best done with a very fine
pencil, at the bottom left-hand corner; it will only be necessary to
number the front of each leaf.


                           PULLING TO PIECES

After the volume has been collated it must be "pulled," that is to
say, the sections must be separated, and all plates or maps detached.

If in a bound book there are slips laced in the front cover, they must
be cut and the back torn off. It will sometimes happen that in tearing
off the leather nearly all the glue will come too, leaving the backs
of the pages detached except for the sewing. More usually the back
will be left covered with a mass of glue and linen, or paper, which it
is very difficult to remove without injury to the backs of the
sections. By drawing a sharp knife along the bands, the sewing may be
cut and the bands removed, leaving the sections only connected by the
glue. Then the sections of the book can usually be separated with a
fine folder, after the thread from the centre of each has been
removed; the point of division being ascertained by finding the first
signature of each section. In cases where the glue and leather form
too hard a back to yield to this method, it is advisable to soak the
glue with paste, and when soft to scrape it off with a folder. As this
method is apt to injure the backs of the sections, it should not be
resorted to unless necessary; and when it is, care must be taken not
to let the damp penetrate into the book, or it will cause very ugly
stains. The book must be pulled while damp, or else the glue will dry
up harder than before. The separated sections must be piled up
carefully to prevent pages being soiled by the damp glue.

All plates or single leaves "pasted on" must be removed. These can
usually be detached by carefully tearing apart, but if too securely
pasted they must be soaked off in water, unless of course the plates
have been painted with water-colour. If the plates must be soaked off,
the leaf and attached plate should be put into a pan of slightly warm
water and left to soak until they float apart, then with a soft brush
any remaining glue or paste can be easily removed while in the water.
Care must be taken not to soak modern books printed on what is called
"Art Paper," as this paper will hardly stand ordinary handling, and is
absolutely ruined if wetted. The growing use of this paper in
important books is one of the greatest troubles the bookbinder has to
face. The highly loaded and glazed surface of some of the heavy plate
papers easily flakes off, so that any guard pasted on these plates is
apt to come away, taking with it the surface of the paper. Moreover,
should the plates chance to be fingered or in any way soiled, nothing
can remove the marks; and should a corner get turned down, the paper
breaks and the corner will fall off. It is the opinion of experts that
this heavily loaded Art Paper will not last a reasonable time, and,
apart from other considerations, this should be ample reason for not
using it in books that are expected to have a permanent value.
Printers like this paper, because it enables them to obtain brilliant
impressions from blocks produced by cheap processes.

In "cased" books, sewn by machinery, the head and tail of the sheets
will often be found to be split up as far as the "kettle" stitches. If
such a book is to be expensively bound, it will require mending
throughout in these places, or the glue may soak into the torn ends,
and make the book open stiffly.

Some books are put together with staples of tinned iron wire, which
rapidly rust and disfigure the book by circular brown marks. Such
marks will usually have to be cut out and the places carefully mended.
This process is lengthy, and consequently so costly, that it is
generally cheaper, when possible, to obtain an unbound copy of the
book from the publishers, than to waste time repairing the damage done
by the cloth binder.

Generally speaking, the sections of a book cased in cloth by modern
methods are so injured as to make it unfit for more permanent binding
unless an unreasonable amount of time is spent on it. It is a great
pity that publishers do not, in the case of books expected to have a
permanent literary value, issue a certain number of copies printed on
good paper, and unbound, for the use of those who require permanent
bindings; and in such copies it would be a great help if sufficient
margin were left at the back of the plates for the binder to turn it
up to form a guard. If the plates were very numerous, guards made of
the substance of the plates themselves would make the book too thick;
but in the case of books with not more than a dozen plates, printed on
comparatively thin paper, it would be a great advantage.

Some books in which there are a large number of plates are cut into
single leaves, which are held together at the back by a coating of an
indiarubber solution. For a short time such a volume is pleasant
enough to handle, and opens freely, but before long the indiarubber
perishes, and the leaves and plates fall apart. When a book of this
kind comes to have a permanent binding, all the leaves and plates have
to be pared at the back and made up into sections with guards--a
troublesome and expensive business. The custom with binders is to
overcast the backs of the leaves in sections, and to sew through the
overcasting thread, but this, though an easy and quick process, makes
a hopelessly stiff back, and no book so treated can open freely.


                               REFOLDING

    [Illustration: FIG. 6.--Dividers]

When the sheets of books that have to be rebound have been carelessly
folded, a certain amount of readjustment is often advisable,
especially in cases where the book has not been previously cut. The
title-page and the half-title, when found to be out of square, should
nearly always be put straight. The folding of the whole book may be
corrected by taking each pair of leaves and holding them up to the
light and adjusting the fold so that the print on one leaf comes
exactly over the print on the other, and creasing the fold to make
them stay in that position. With a pair of dividers (fig. 6) set to
the height of the shortest top margin, points the same distance above
the headline of the other leaves can be made. Then against a
carpenter's square, adjusted to the back of the fold, the head of one
pair of leaves at a time can be cut square (see fig. 7). If the book
has been previously cut this process is apt to throw the leaves so far
out of their original position as to make them unduly uneven.

    [Illustration: FIG. 7.]

Accurate folding is impossible if the "register" of the printing is
bad, that is to say, if the print on the back of a leaf does not lie
exactly over that on the front.

Crooked plates should usually be made straight by judicious trimming
of the margins. It is better to leave a plate short at tail or
fore-edge than to leave it out of square.


                          KNOCKING OUT JOINTS

The old "joints" must be knocked out of the sections of books that
have been previously backed. To do this, one or two sections at a time
are held firmly in the left hand, and well hammered on the
knocking-down iron fixed into the lying press. It is important that
the hammer face should fall exactly squarely upon the paper, or it may
cut pieces out. The knocking-down iron should be covered with a piece
of paper, and the hammer face must be perfectly clean, or the sheets
may be soiled.




                              CHAPTER III

        Guarding--Throwing Out--Paring Paper--Soaking off India
              Proofs--Mounting very Thin Paper--Splitting
                  Paper--Inlaying--Flattening Vellum


                               GUARDING

Guards are slips of thin paper or linen used for strengthening the
fold of leaves that are damaged, or for attaching plates or single
leaves.

Guards should be of good thin paper. That known as Whatman's Banknote
paper answers very well. An easy way to cut guards is shown in fig.
8. Two or three pieces of paper of the height of the required guards
are folded and pinned to the board by the right-hand corners. A series
of points are marked at the head and tail with dividers set to the
width desired for the guards, and with a knife guided by a
straight-edge, cuts joining the points are made right through the
paper, but not extending quite to either end. On a transverse cut
being made near the bottom, the guards are left attached by one end
only (see fig. 9), and can be torn off as wanted. This method prevents
the paper from slipping while it is being cut.

    [Illustration: FIG. 8.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 9.]

A mount cutter's knife (fig. 10) will be found to be a convenient form
of knife to use for cutting guards.

In using the knife and straight-edge a good deal of pressure should be
put on the straight-edge, and comparatively little on the knife.

    [Illustration: FIG. 10.--Mount Cutter's Knife]

To mend the torn back of a pair of leaves, a guard should be selected
a little longer than the height of the pages and well pasted with
white paste (see page 288). If the pair of leaves are not quite
separated, the pasted guard held by its extremities may be simply laid
along the weak place and rubbed down through blotting-paper. If the
leaves are quite apart, it is better to lay the pasted guard on a
piece of glass and put the edges of first one and then the other leaf
on to it and rub down.

On an outside pair of leaves the guard should be inside, so that the
glue may catch any ragged edges; while on the inside pair the guard
should be outside, or it will be found to be troublesome in sewing. In
handling the pasted guards care is needed not to stretch them, or they
may cause the sheet to crinkle as they dry.

    [Illustration: FIG. 11.]

Plates must be guarded round the sections next them. When there are a
great many plates the back margin of each, to which a guard will be
attached, must be pared (see fig. 11, A), or the additional thickness
caused by the guards will make the back swell unduly. In guarding
plates a number can be pasted at once if they are laid one on another,
with about an eighth of an inch of the back of each exposed, the top
of the pile being protected by a folded piece of waste paper (see fig.
12). To paste, the brush is brought from the top to the bottom of the
pile only, and not the other way, or paste will get between the plates
and soil them. Guards should usually be attached to the backs of
plates, and should be wide enough to turn up round the adjoining
section, so that they may be sewn through. Should a plate come in the
middle of a section, the guard is best turned back and slightly pasted
to the inside of the sheet and then sewn through in the ordinary way.

    [Illustration: FIG. 12.]

If plates are very thick, they must be hinged, as shown at fig. 11, B.
This is done by cutting a strip of about a quarter of an inch off the
back of the plate, and guarding with a wide guard of linen, leaving a
small space between the plate and the piece cut off to form a hinge.
It will save some swelling if the plate is pared and a piece of
thinner paper substituted for the piece cut off (see fig. 11, C). If
the plates are of cardboard, they should be guarded on both sides with
linen, and may even need a second joint.

A book that consists entirely of plates or single leaves must be made
up into sections with guards, and sewn as usual. In books in which
there are a great many plates, it is often found that two plates
either come together in the centre of a section, or come at opposite
sides of the same pair of leaves. Such plates should be guarded
together and treated as folded sheets (see fig. 13).

    [Illustration: FIG. 13.]

In order to be sure that the pages of a book to be guarded throughout
will come in their proper order, it is well to make a plan of the
sections as follows, and to check each pair of leaves by it, as they
are guarded:--

Thus, if the book is to be made up into sections of eight leaves, the
pairs of leaves to be guarded together can be seen at once if the
number of the pages are written out--

    1, 3, 5, 7,--9, 11, 13, 15.

First the inside pair, 7 and 9, are guarded together with the guard
outside, then the next pair, 5 and 11, then 3 and 13, and then the
outside pair, 1 and 15, which should have the guard outside. A plan
for the whole book would be more conveniently written thus--

    1-15   17-31   33-47
    3-13   19-29   35-45
    5-11   21-27   37-43
    7-9    23-25   39-41, and so on.

To arrange a book of single leaves for guarding, it is convenient to
take as many leaves as you intend to go to a section, and opening them
in the centre, take a pair at a time as they come.

The number of leaves it is advisable to put into a section will depend
on the thickness of the paper and the size and thickness of the book.
If the paper is thick, and the backs of the leaves have been pared,
four leaves to a section will be found to answer. But if the paper is
thin, and does not allow of much paring, it is better to have a larger
section, in order to have as little thread in the back as possible.

The sheets of any guarded book should be pressed before sewing, in
order to reduce the swelling of the back caused by the guards.


                             THROWING OUT

    [Illustration: FIG. 14.]

Maps or diagrams that are frequently referred to in the text of a
book, should be "thrown out" on a guard as wide as the sheet of the
book. Such maps, &c., should be placed at the end, so that they may
lie open for reference while the book is being read (see fig. 14).
Large folded maps or diagrams should be mounted on linen. To do this
take a piece of jaconet and pin it out flat on the board, then evenly
paste the back of the map with thin paste in which there are no lumps,
and lay it on the linen, rub down through blotting-paper, and leave to
dry. Unless the pasting is done evenly the marks of the paste-brush
will show through the linen. If a folded map is printed on very thick
paper each fold must be cut up, and the separate pieces mounted on the
linen, with a slight space between them to form a flexible joint.

    [Illustration: FIG. 15.]

A folded map must have in the back of the book sufficient guards to
equal it in thickness at its thickest part when folded, or the book
will not shut properly (see fig. 15).


                             PARING PAPER

For paring the edge of paper for mending or guarding, take a very
sharp knife, and holding the blade at right angles to the
covering-board, draw the edge once or twice along it from left to
right. This should turn up enough of the edge to form a "burr," which
causes the knife to cut while being held almost flat on the paper. The
plate or paper should be laid face downwards on the glass with the
edge to be pared away from the workman, the knife held in the right
hand, with the burr downwards. The angle at which to hold the knife
will depend on its shape and on the thickness and character of the
paper to be pared, and can only be learned by practice. If the knife
is in order, and is held at the proper angle, the shaving removed from
a straight edge of paper should come off in a long spiral. If the
knife is not in proper order, the paper may be badly jagged or
creased.


                       SOAKING OFF INDIA PROOFS

Place a piece of well-sized paper in a pan of warm water, then lay the
mounted India proof, face downwards, upon it and leave it to soak
until the proof floats off. Then carefully take out the old mount, and
the India proof can be readily removed from the water on the under
paper, and dried between sheets of blotting-paper.


                       MOUNTING VERY THIN PAPER

Very thin paper, such as that of some "India" proofs, may be safely
mounted as follows:--The mount, ready for use, is laid on a pad of
blotting-paper. The thin paper to be mounted is laid face downwards on
a piece of glass and very carefully pasted with thin, white paste. Any
paste on the glass beyond the edges of the paper is carefully wiped
off with a clean cloth. The glass may then be turned over, and the
pasted plate laid on the mount, its exact position being seen through
the glass.


                            SPLITTING PAPER

It is sometimes desirable to split pieces of paper when the matter on
one side only is needed, or when the matter printed on each side is to
be used in different places. The paper to be split should be well
pasted on both sides with a thickish paste, and fine linen or jaconet
placed on each side. It is then nipped in the press to make the linen
stick all over, and left to dry.

If the two pieces of jaconet are carefully pulled apart when dry, half
the paper should be attached to each, unless at any point the paste
has failed to stick, when the paper will tear. The jaconet and paper
attached must be put into warm water until the split paper floats off.


                       INLAYING LEAVES OR PLATES

    [Illustration: FIG. 16.]

When a small plate or leaf has to be inserted into a larger book, it
is best to "inlay it"; that is to say, the plate or leaf is let into a
sheet of paper the size of the page of the book. To do this, a piece
of paper as thick as the plate to be inlaid, or a little thicker, is
selected, and on this is laid the plate, which should have been
previously squared, and the positions of the corners marked with a
folder. A point is made about an eighth of an inch inside each corner
mark, and the paper within these points is cut out (see fig. 16). This
leaves a frame of paper, the inner edges of which will slightly
overlap the edges of the plate. The under edge of the plate, and the
upper edge of the mount, should then be pared and pasted, and the
plate laid in its place (with the corners corresponding to the folder
marks). If the edges have been properly pared, the thickness where
they overlap should not exceed the thickness of the frame paper. If an
irregular fragment is to be inlaid, it is done in the same way, except
that the entire outline is traced on the new paper with a folder, and
the paper cut away, allowing one eighth of an inch inside the indented
line.


                           FLATTENING VELLUM

The leaves of a vellum book that have become cockled from damp or
other causes may be flattened by damping them, pulling them out
straight, and allowing them to dry under pressure. To do this take the
book to pieces, clean out any dirt there may be in the folds of the
leaves, and spread out each pair of leaves as flatly as possible.

Damp some white blotting-paper by interleaving it with common white
paper that has been wetted with a sponge. One sheet of wet paper to
two of blotting-paper will be enough. The pile of blotting-paper and
wet paper is put in the press and left for an hour or two under
pressure, then taken out and the common paper removed.

The blotting-paper should now be slightly and evenly damp. To flatten
the vellum the open pairs of leaves are interleaved with the slightly
damp blotting-paper, and are left for an hour under the weight of a
pressing-board. After this time the vellum will have become quite
soft, and can with care be flattened out and lightly pressed between
the blotting-paper, and left for a night. The next day the vellum
leaves should be looked at to see that they lie quite flat, and the
blotting-paper changed for some that is dry. The vellum must remain
under pressure until it is quite dry, or it will cockle up worse than
ever when exposed to the air. The blotting-paper should be changed
every day or two. The length of time that vellum leaves take to dry
will vary with the state of the atmosphere, and the thickness of the
vellum, from one to six weeks.

Almost any manuscript or printed book on vellum can be successfully
flattened in this way; miniatures should have pieces of waxed paper
laid over them to prevent the chance of any of the fibres of the
blotting-paper sticking. The pressure must not be great; only enough
is needed to keep the vellum flat as it dries.

This process of flattening, although so simple, requires the utmost
care. If the blotting-paper is used too damp, a manuscript may be
ruined; and if not damp enough, the pressing will have no effect.




                              CHAPTER IV

                       Sizing--Washing--Mending


                                SIZING

The paper in old books is sometimes soft and woolly. This is generally
because the size has perished, and such paper can often be made
perfectly sound by resizing.

    [Illustration: FIG. 17.]

For size, an ounce of isinglass or good gelatine is dissolved in a
quart of water. This should make a clear solution when gently warmed,
and should be used at about a temperature of 120 F. Care must be
taken not to heat too quickly, or the solution may burn and turn
brown. If the size is not quite clear, it should be strained through
fine muslin or linen before being used. When it is ready it should be
poured into an open pan (fig. 17), so arranged that it can be kept
warm by a gas flame or spirit lamp underneath. When this is ready the
sheets to be sized can be put in one after another and taken out at
once. The hot size will be found to take out a great many stains, and
especially those deep brown stains that come from water. If there are
only a few sheets, they can be placed between blotting-paper as they
are removed from the size; but if there is a whole book, it is best to
lay them in a pile one on the other, and when all have been sized to
squeeze them in the "lying press" between pressing-boards, a pan being
put underneath to catch the liquid squeezed out. When the sheets have
been squeezed they can be readily handled, and should be spread out to
dry on a table upon clean paper. When they are getting dry and firm
they can be hung on strings stretched across the room, slightly
overlapping one another. The strings must first be covered with slips
of clean paper, and the sized sheets should have more paper over them
to keep them clean.

Before sizing it will be necessary to go through a book and take out
any pencil or dust marks that can be removed with indiarubber or bread
crumbs, or the size will fix them, and it will be found exceedingly
difficult to remove them afterwards.

When the sheets are dry they should be carefully mended in any places
that may be torn, and folded up into sections and pressed. A long,
comparatively light pressure will be found to flatten them better and
with less injury to the surface of the paper than a short, very heavy
pressure, such as that of the rolling-machine.

In some cases it will be found that sheets of old books are so far
damaged as to be hardly strong enough to handle. Such sheets must be
sized in rather a stronger size in the following way:--Take a sheet of
heavily-sized paper, such as notepaper, and carefully lay your damaged
sheet on that. Then put another sheet of strong paper on the top, and
put all three sheets into the size. It will be found that the top
sheet can then be easily lifted off, and the size be made to flow over
the face of the damaged sheet. Then, if the top sheet be put on again,
the three sheets, if handled as one, can be turned over and the
operation repeated, and size induced to cover the back of the damaged
leaf. The three sheets must then be taken out and laid between
blotting-paper to take up the surplus moisture. The top sheet must
then be carefully peeled off, and the damaged page laid face downwards
on clean blotting-paper. Then the back sheet can be peeled off as
well, leaving the damaged sheet to dry.

The following is quoted from "Chambers' Encyclopdia" on Gelatine:--

"Gelatine should never be judged by the eye alone.

"Its purity may be very easily tested thus: Soak it in cold water,
then pour upon it a small quantity of boiling water. If pure, it will
form a thickish, clear straw-coloured solution, free from smell; but
if made of impure materials, it will give off a very offensive odour,
and have a yellow, gluey consistency."


                                WASHING

When there are stains or ink marks on books that cannot be removed by
the use of hot size or hot water, stronger measures may sometimes have
to be taken. Many stains will be found to yield readily to hot water
with a little alum in it, and others can be got out by a judicious
application of curd soap with a very soft brush and plenty of warm
water. But some, and especially ink stains, require further treatment.
There are many ways of washing paper, and most of those in common use
are extremely dangerous, and have in many cases resulted in the
absolute destruction of fine books. If it is thought to be absolutely
necessary that the sheets of a book should be washed, the safest
method is as follows:--Take an ounce of permanganate of potash
dissolved in a quart of water, and warmed slightly. In this put the
sheets to be washed, and leave them until they turn a dark brown. This
will usually take about an hour, but may take longer for some papers.
Then turn the sheets out and wash them in running water until all
trace of purple stain disappears from the water as it comes away. Then
transfer them to a bath of sulphurous (not sulphuric) acid and water
in the proportion of one ounce of acid to one pint of water. The
sheets in this solution will rapidly turn white, and if left for some
time nearly all stains will be removed. In case any stains refuse to
come out, the sheets should be put in clear water for a short time,
and then placed in the permanganate of potash solution again, and left
there for a longer time than before; then after washing in clear
water, again transferred to the sulphurous acid. When sheets are
removed from the sulphurous acid they should be well washed for an
hour or two in running water, and then may be blotted or squeezed off
and hung up on lines to dry. Any sheets treated in this way will
require sizing afterwards. And if, as is often the case, only a few
sheets at the beginning or end of the book have to be washed, it will
be necessary to tone down the washed sheets to match the rest of the
book by putting some stain in the size. For staining there are many
things used. A weak solution of permanganate of potash gives a
yellowish stain that will be found to match many papers. Other stains
are used, such as coffee, chicory, tea, liquorice, &c. Whatever is
used should be put in the size. To ascertain that the right depth of
colour has been obtained, a piece of unsized paper, such as white
blotting-paper, is dipped in the stained size and blotted off and
dried before the fire. It is impossible to judge of the depth of
colour in a stain unless the test piece is thoroughly dried. If the
stain is not right, add more water or more stain as is needed.
Experience will tell what stain to use to match the paper of any given
book.

To remove grease or oil stains, ether may be used. Pour it freely in a
circle round the spot, narrowing the circle gradually until the stain
is covered. Then apply a warm iron through a piece of blotting-paper.

Ether should only be used in a draught in a well-ventilated room on
account of its well-known inflammable and ansthetical properties.

A very dilute (about one per cent.) solution of pure hydrochloric acid
in cold water will be found to take out some stains if the paper is
left in it for some hours. When the paper is removed from the
solution, it must be thoroughly washed in running water. It is
important that the hydrochloric acid used should be pure, as the
commercial quality (spirits of salts) often contains sulphuric acid.

The following recipes are quoted from _De l'organisation et de
l'administration des Bibliothques, par Jules Cusin_:--

To remove stains from paper:--"_Mud Stains._--To take away these kinds
of stains, spread some soap jelly very evenly over the stained places,
and leave it there for thirty or forty minutes, according to the depth
of the stain. Then dip the sheet in clean water, and then having
spread it on a perfectly clean table, remove the soap lightly with a
hog's hair brush or a fine sponge; all the mud will disappear at the
same time. Put the sheet into the clear water again, to get rid of the
last trace of soap. Let it drain a little, press it lightly between
two sheets of blotting-paper, and finish by letting it dry slowly in
a dry place in the shade.

"_Stains of Tallow, Stearine, or Fat._--To take away these stains
cover them with blotting-paper and pass over them a warm flat-iron.
When the paper has soaked up the grease, change it and repeat the
operation until the stains have been sufficiently removed. After that,
touch both sides of the sheets where they have been stained with a
brush dipped in essence of turpentine heated to boiling-point. Then to
restore the whiteness of the paper, touch the places which were
stained with a piece of fine linen soaked in purified spirits of wine
warmed in the water-bath. This method may also be employed to get rid
of sealing-wax stains.

"_Oil Stains._--Make a mixture of 500 gr. of soap, 300 gr. of clay, 60
gr. of quicklime, and sufficient water to make it of the right
consistency, spread a thin layer of this on the stain, and leave it
there about a quarter of an hour. Then dip the sheet in a bath of hot
water; take it out, and let it dry slowly.

"You can also use the following method, generally employed for
finger-marks:--

"_Finger-marks._--These stains are sometimes very obstinate. Still
they can generally be mastered by the following method:--Spread over
them a layer of white soap jelly (_savon blanc en gele_), and leave
it there for some hours. Then remove this with a fine sponge dipped in
hot water, and more often than not all the dirt disappears at the same
time. If this treatment is not sufficient, you might replace the soap
jelly by soft soap (_savon noir_), but you must be careful not to
leave it long on the printing, which might decompose and run, and that
would do more harm than good."

Sheets of very old books are best left with the stains of age upon
them, excepting, perhaps, such as can be removed with hot water or
size. Nearly all stains _can_ be removed, but in the process old paper
is apt to lose more in character than it gains in appearance.


                                MENDING

For mending torn sheets of an old book, some paper that matches as
nearly as possible must be found. For this purpose it is the custom
for bookbinders to collect quantities of old paper. If a piece of the
same tone cannot be found, paper of similar texture and substance may
be stained to match.

Supposing a corner to be missing, and a piece of paper to have been
found that matches it, the torn page is laid over the new paper in
such a way that the wire marks on both papers correspond. Then the
point of a folder should be drawn along the edge of the torn sheet,
leaving an indented line on the new paper. The new paper should then
be cut off about an eighth of an inch beyond the indented line, and
the edge carefully pared up to the line. The edge of the old paper
must be similarly pared, so that the two edges when laid together will
not exceed the thickness of the rest of the page. It is well to leave
a little greater overlap at the edges of the page. Both cut edges must
then be well pasted with white paste and rubbed down between
blotting-paper. To ensure a perfectly clean joint the pasted edge
should not be touched with the hand, and pasting-paper, brushes, and
paste must be perfectly clean.

In the case of a tear across the page, if there are any overlapping
edges, they may merely be pasted together and the end of the tear at
the edge of the paper strengthened by a small piece of pared paper. If
the tear crosses print, and there are no overlapping edges, either
tiny pieces of pared paper may be cut and laid across the tear between
the lines of print, or else a piece of the thinnest Japanese paper,
which is nearly transparent, may be pasted right along the tear over
the print; in either case the mend should be strengthened at the edge
of the page by an additional thickness of paper. In cases where the
backs of the sections have been much damaged, it will be necessary to
put a guard the entire length, or in the case of small holes, to fill
them in with pieces of torn paper. The edges of any mend may, with
great care, be scraped with a sharp knife having a slight burr on the
under side, and then rubbed lightly with a piece of worn fine
sand-paper, or a fragment of cuttle-fish bone. Care must be taken not
to pare away too much, and especially not to weaken the mend at the
edges of the sheet. As a general rule, the new mending paper should go
on the back of a sheet.

Sometimes it is thought necessary to fill up worm-holes in the paper.
This may be done by boiling down some paper in size until it is of a
pulpy consistency, and a little of this filled into the worm-holes
will re-make the paper in those places. It is a very tedious
operation, and seldom worth doing.

Mending vellum is done in much the same way as mending paper,
excepting that a little greater overlap must be left. It is well to
put a stitch of silk at each end of a vellum patch, as you cannot
depend on paste alone holding vellum securely. The overlapping edges
must be well roughed up with a knife to make sure that the paste will
stick. A cut in a vellum page is best mended with fine silk with a
lacing stitch (see fig. 18).

    [Illustration: FIG. 18.]

Mending is most easily done on a sheet of plate-glass, of which the
edges and corners have been rubbed down.




                               CHAPTER V

                 End Papers--Leather Joints--Pressing


                              END PAPERS

If an old book that has had much wear is examined, it will generally
be found that the leaves at the beginning and the end have suffered
more than the rest of the book. On this ground, and also to enable
people who must write notes in books to do so with the least injury to
the book, it is advisable to put a good number of blank papers at each
end. As these papers are part of the binding, and have an important
protective function to perform, they should be of good quality. At all
times difficulty has been found in preventing the first and last
section of the book, whether end papers or not, from dragging away
when the cover is opened, and various devices have been tried to
overcome this defect. In the fifteenth century strips of vellum
(usually cut from manuscripts) were pasted on to the back of the book
and on the inside of the boards, or in some cases were merely folded
round the first and last section and pasted on to the covers. The
modern, and far less efficient, practice is to "overcast" the first
and last sections. This is objectionable, because it prevents the
leaves from opening right to the back, and it fails in the object
aimed at, by merely transferring the strain to the back of the
overcast section.

In order to make provision for any strain there may be in opening the
cover, it is better to adopt some such arrangement as shown in fig.
19. In this end paper the zigzag opens slightly in response to any
strain.

The way to make this end paper is to take a folded sheet of paper a
little larger than the book. Then with dividers mark two points an
eighth of an inch from the back for the fold, and paste your
paste-down paper, B B, up to these points (see fig. 19, II). When the
paste is dry, fold back the sheet (A1) over the paste-down paper, and
A2 the reverse way, leaving the form seen in fig. 19, III. A folded
sheet of paper similar to A is inserted at C (fig. 19, V, H), and the
sewing passes through this. When the book is pasted down the leaf A1
is torn off, and B1 pasted down on the board. If marbled paper is
desired, the marble should be "made," that is, pasted on to B1.

    [Illustration: FIG. 19.]

There are considerable disadvantages in using marbled papers, as if
they are of thick enough paper to help the strength of the binding,
the "made" sheet is very stiff, and in a small book is troublesome. On
no account should any marble paper be used, unless it is tough and
durable. The quality of the paper of which most marbled papers are
made is so poor, that it is unsuitable for use as end papers. For most
books a self-coloured paper of good quality answers well for the
paste-down sheets.

It is a mistake to leave end papers to be pasted on after the book has
been forwarded, as in that case they have little constructive value.
Every leaf of such an end paper as is described above will open right
to the back, and the zigzag allows play for the drag of the board.

Paper with a conventional pattern painted or printed on it may be used
for end papers. If such a design is simple, such as a sprig repeated
all over, or an arrangement of stars or dots, it may look very well;
but over elaborate end papers, and especially those that aim at
pictorial effect, are seldom successful.

Ends may be made of thin vellum. If so, unless the board is very
heavy, it is best to have leather joints.

A single leaf of vellum (in the place of B1 and 2, II, fig. 19) should
have an edge turned up into the zigzag with the leather joint, and
sewn through. Vellum ends must always be sewn, as it is not safe to
rely upon paste to hold them. They look well, and may be enriched by
tooling. The disadvantage of vellum is, that it has a tendency to curl
up if subjected to heat, and when it contracts it unduly draws the
boards of the book. For large manuscripts, or printed books on vellum,
which are bound in wooden or other thick boards and are clasped,
thicker vellum may be used for the ends; that with a slightly brown
surface looks best. The part that will come into the joint should be
scraped thin with a knife, and a zigzag made of Japanese paper.

Silk or other fine woven material may be used for ends. It is best
used with a leather joint, and may be stuck on to the first paper of
the end papers (B1, No. 2, fig. 19), and cut with the book. The
glaire of the edge gilding will help to stop the edges fraying out. In
attaching silk to paper, thin glue is the best thing to use; the
paper, not the silk, being glued. Some little practice is needed to
get sufficient glue on the paper to make the silk stick all over, and
yet not to soil it. When the silk has been glued to the paper, it
should be left under a light weight to dry. If put in the press, the
glue may be squeezed through and the silk soiled.

If the silk is very thin, or delicate in colour, or if it seems likely
that it will fray out at the edges, it is better to turn the edges in
over a piece of paper cut a little smaller than the page of the book
and stick them down. This forms a pad, which may be attached to the
first leaf of the end papers; a similar pad may be made for filling in
the board.

Before using, the silk should be damped and ironed flat on the wrong
side.

Silk ends give a book a rich finish, but seldom look altogether
satisfactory. If the silk is merely stuck on to the first end paper,
the edges will generally fray out if the book is much used. If the
edges are turned in, an unpleasantly thick end is made.


                            LEATHER JOINTS

Leather joints are pieces of thin leather that are used to cover the
joints on the inside (for paring, see page 154). They add very little
strength to the book, but give a pleasant finish to the inside of the
board.

If there are to be leather joints, the end papers are made up without
A 1, and the edge of the leather pasted and inserted at D, with a
piece of common paper as a protection (see fig. 19, IV). When the
paste is dry, the leather is folded over at E.

A piece of blotting-paper may be pasted on to the inside of the waste
leaf, leaving enough of it loose to go between the leather joint and
the first sheet of the end paper. This will avoid any chance of the
leather joint staining or marking the ends while the book is being
bound. The blotting-paper, of course, is taken out with the waste
sheet before the joint is pasted down.

Joints may also be made of linen or cloth inserted in the same way. A
cloth joint has greater strength than a leather one, as the latter has
to be very thin in order that the board may shut properly.

With leather or cloth joints, the sewing should go through both E and
F.


                               PRESSING

    [Illustration: FIG. 20.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 21.--Standing Press]

While the end papers are being made, the sections of the book should
be pressed. To do this a pressing-board is taken which is a little
larger than the book, and a tin, covered with common paper, placed on
that, then a few sections of the book, then another tin covered with
paper, and then more sections, and so on, taking care that the
sections are exactly over one another (see fig. 20). A second
pressing-board having been placed on the last tin, the pile of
sections, tins, and pressing-boards can be put into the standing-press
and left under pressure till next day. Newly printed plates should be
protected by thin tissue paper while being pressed. Any folded plates
or maps, &c., or inserted letters, must either not be pressed, or have
tins placed on each side of them to prevent them from indenting the
adjoining leaves.

    [Illustration: FIG. 22.--French Standing Press]

Hand-printed books, such as the publications of the Kelmscott Press,
should have very little pressure, or the "impression" of the print and
the surface of the paper may be injured. Books newly printed on vellum
or heavily coloured illustrations should not be pressed at all, or the
print may "set off."

The protecting tissues on the plates of a book that has been printed
for more than a year can generally be left out, unless the titles of
the plates are printed on them, as they are a nuisance to readers and
often get crumpled up and mark the book.

In order to make books solid, that is, to make the leaves lie evenly
and closely to one another, it was formerly the custom to beat books
on a "stone" with a heavy hammer. This process has been superseded by
the rolling-press; but with the admirable presses that are now to be
had, simple pressing will be found to be sufficient for the "extra"
binder.

At fig. 21 is shown an iron standing-press. This is screwed down first
with a short bar, and finally with a long bar. This form of press is
effective and simple, but needs a good deal of room for the long bar,
and must have very firm supports, or it may be pulled over.

At fig. 22 is shown a French standing-press, in which the pressure is
applied by a weighted wheel, which will, in the first place, by being
spun round, turn the screw until it is tight, and give additional
pressure by a hammering action. This press I have found to answer for
all ordinary purposes, and to give as great pressure as can be got by
the iron standing-press, without any undue strain on supports or
workmen.

There are many other forms of press by which great pressure can be
applied, some working by various arrangements of cog-wheels, screws,
and levers, others by hydraulic pressure.




                              CHAPTER VI

              Trimming Edges before Sewing--Edge Gilding


                        TRIMMING BEFORE SEWING

When the sheets come from the press the treatment of the edges must be
decided upon, that is, whether they are to be entirely uncut, trimmed
before sewing, or cut in boards.

Early printed books and manuscripts should on no account have their
edges cut at all, and any modern books of value are better only
slightly trimmed and gilt before sewing. But for books of reference
that need good bindings, on account of the wear they have to
withstand, cutting in boards is best, as the smooth edge so obtained
makes the leaves easier to turn over. Gilt tops and rough edges give a
book a look of unequal finish.

If the edges are to remain uncut, or be cut "in boards" with the
plough, the book will be ready for "marking up" as soon as it comes
from the press; but if it is to be gilt before sewing, it must be
first trimmed.

    [Illustration: Fig. 23.]

The sheets for trimming with end papers and all plates inserted must
first be cut square at the head against a carpenter's square (see fig.
7). Then a piece of mill-board may be cut to the size, it is desired
to leave the leaves, and the sections trimmed to it. To do this three
nails should be put into the covering board through a piece of
straw-board, and the back of the section slid along nails 1 and 2
until it touches No. 3 (see fig. 23). The board is slid in the same
way, and anything projecting beyond it cut off. When the under
straw-board has become inconveniently scored in the first position, by
shifting the lower nail (1) a fresh surface will receive the cuts.
Fig. 24 is a representation of a simple machine that I use in my
workshop for trimming. The slides A A are adjustable to any width
required, and are fixed by the screws B B. The brass-bound straight
edge C fits on to slots in A A, and as this, by the adjustment of the
slides, can be fixed at any distance from B B, all sizes of books can
be trimmed. As by this machine several sections can be cut at once,
the time taken is not very much greater than if the book were cut in
the plough.

    [Illustration: FIG. 24.]

Considerable judgment is required in trimming. The edges of the larger
pages only, on a previously uncut book, should be cut, leaving the
smaller pages untouched. Such uncut pages are called "proof," and the
existence of proof in a bound book is evidence that it has not been
unduly cut.

Before gilding the edges of the trimmed sections, any uncut folds
that may remain should be opened with a folder, as if opened after
gilding, they will show a ragged white edge.

    [Illustration: FIG. 25.]


                             EDGE GILDING

To gild the edges of trimmed sections, the book must be "knocked up"
to the fore-edge, getting as many of the short leaves as possible to
the front. It is then put into the "lying press," with gilding boards
on each side (see fig. No. 25), and screwed up tightly. Very little
scraping will be necessary, and usually if well rubbed with fine
sand-paper, to remove any chance finger-marks or loose fragments of
paper, the edge will be smooth enough to gild. If the paper is very
absorbent, the edges must be washed over with vellum size and left to
dry.

The next process is an application of red chalk. For this a piece of
gilder's red chalk is rubbed down on a stone with water, making a
thickish paste, and the edges are well brushed with a hard brush
dipped in this mixture, care being taken not to have it wet enough to
run between the leaves. Some gilders prefer to use blacklead or a
mixture of chalk and blacklead. A further brushing with a dry brush
will to some extent polish the leaves. It will then be ready for an
application of glaire. Before glairing, the gold must be cut on the
cushion to the width required (see p. 200), and may be either taken up
on very slightly greased paper, a gilder's tip, or with a piece of net
stretched on a little frame (see fig. 26). The gold leaf will adhere
sufficiently to the net, and can be readily released by a light breath
when it is exactly over the proper place on the edge.

When the gold is ready, the glaire should be floated on to the edge
with a soft brush, and the gold spread evenly over it and left until
dry; that is, in a workshop of ordinary temperature, for about an
hour. The edge is then lightly rubbed with a piece of leather that has
been previously rubbed on beeswax, and is ready for burnishing. It is
best to commence burnishing through a piece of thin slightly waxed
paper to set the gold, and afterwards the burnisher can be used
directly on the edge. A piece of bloodstone ground so as to have no
sharp edges (see fig. 27) makes a good burnisher.

    [Illustration: FIG. 26]

    [Illustration: FIG. 27.]

There are several different preparations used for gilding edges. One
part of beaten up white of egg with four parts of water left to stand
for a day and strained will be found to answer well.

After the fore-edge is gilt the same operation is repeated at the head
and tail. As it is desirable to have the gilding at the head as solid
as possible, rather more scraping is advisable here, or the head may
be left to be cut with a plough and gilt in boards.




                              CHAPTER VII

               Marking up--Sewing--Materials for Sewing


                              MARKING UP

This is drawing lines across the back of the sections to show the
sewer the position of the sewing cords.

Marking up for flexible sewing needs care and judgment, as on it
depends the position of the bands on the back of the bound book.
Nearly all books look best with five bands, but very large, thinnish
folios may have six, and a very small, thick book may look better with
four. Generally speaking, five is the best number. In marking up
trimmed sheets for flexible sewing, the length of the back should be
divided from the head into six portions, five equal, and one at the
tail slightly longer. From the points so arrived at, strong pencil
lines should be made across the back with a carpenter's square as
guide, the book having been previously knocked up between
pressing-boards, and placed in the lying press. It is important that
the head should be knocked up exactly square, as otherwise the bands
will be found to slope when the book is bound. In the case of a book
which is to be cut and gilt in boards, before marking up it will be
necessary to decide how much is to be cut off, and allowance made, or
the head and tail division of the back will, when cut, be too small.
It must also be remembered that to the height of the pages the amount
of the "squares" will be added.

About a quarter of an inch from either end of the back of a trimmed
book, and a little more in the case of one that is to be cut in
boards, a mark should be made for the "kettle" or "catch" stitch. This
may be slightly sawn in, but before using the saw, the end papers are
removed. If these were sawn, the holes would show in the joint when
the ends are pasted down.

If the book is to be sewn on double cords, or on slips of vellum or
tape, two lines will be necessary for each band.

It has become the custom to saw in the backs of books, and to sink the
bands into the saw cuts, using "hollow backs," and putting false bands
to appear when bound. This is a degenerate form, to which is due much
of the want of durability of modern bindings. If the bands are not to
show on the back, it is better to sew on tapes or strips of vellum
than to use sawn-in string bands.


                                SEWING

The sewing-frame need by bookbinders is practically the same now as is
shown in prints of the early sixteenth century, and probably dates
from still earlier times. It consists of a bed with two uprights and a
crossbar, which can be heightened or lowered by the turning of wooden
nuts working on a screw thread cut in the uprights (see fig. 29).

To set up for sewing, as many loops of cord, called "lay cords," as
there are to be bands, are threaded on to the cross piece, and to
these, by a simple knot, shown at fig. 28, cords are fastened to form
the bands. The "lay cords" can be used again and again until worn
out.

    [Illustration: FIG. 28.]

To fasten the cord below, a key is taken (see fig. 28) and held below
the press by the right hand; the cord is then pulled up round it by
the left, and held in position on the key by the first finger of the
right hand. The key is then turned over, winding up a little of the
string, and the prongs slipped over the main cord. It is then put
through the slit in the bed of the sewing-press, with the prongs away
from the front. The cord is then cut off, and the same operation
repeated for each band. When all the bands have been set up, the book
is laid against them, and they are moved to correspond with the marks
previously made on the back of the book, care being taken that they
are quite perpendicular. If they are of the same length and evenly set
up, on screwing up the crossbar they should all tighten equally.

It will be found to be convenient to set up the cords as far to the
right hand of the press as possible, as then there will be room for
the sewer's left arm on the inner side of the left hand upright.

A roll of paper that will exactly fill the slot in the sewing-frame is
pushed in in front of the upright cords to steady them and ensure
that they are all in the same plane.

When the sewing-frame is ready, with the cords set up and adjusted,
the book must be collated to make sure that neither sheets nor plates
have been lost or misplaced during the previous operations. Plates
need special care to see that the guards go properly round the sheets
next them.

    [Illustration: FIG. 29.]

The top back corner, on front and back waste end paper, should be
marked. When this has been done, and all is found to be in order, the
book is laid on a pressing-board behind the sewing-frame, the
fore-edge towards the sewer, and the front end paper uppermost. As it
is difficult to insert the needle into a section placed on the bed of
the sewing-frame, it will be found convenient to sew upon a largish
pressing-board, which will lie on the bed of the frame, and may have
small catches to prevent it from shifting. When the board is in place,
the first section (end paper) is taken in the left hand and turned
over, so that the marks on the back come in the proper places against
the strings. The left hand is inserted into the place where the sewing
is to be, and with the right hand a needle and thread is passed
through the kettle stitch mark (see fig. 29). It is grasped by the
fingers of the left hand, is passed out through the back at the first
mark on the left-hand side of the first upright cord, and pulled
tight, leaving a loose end of thread at the kettle stitch. Then with
the right hand it is inserted again in the same place, but from the
other side of the cord, and so on round all five bands, and out again
at the kettle stitch mark at the tail, using right and left hands
alternately. The centre of the next section is then found, and it is
sewn in the same way from tail to head, the thread being tied to the
loose end hanging from the first kettle stitch. Another section is
laid on and sewn, but when the kettle stitch is reached, the under
thread is caught up in the way shown in fig. 30. These operations are
repeated throughout the whole book. If the back seems likely to swell
too much, the sections can be lightly tapped down with a loaded stick
made for the purpose, care being taken not to drive the sections
inwards, as it is difficult to get such sections out again. When all
the sheets and the last end paper have been sewn on, a double catch
stitch is made, and the end cut off. This method is known as flexible
sewing "all along."

    [Illustration: FIG. 30.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 31.]

When one needle full of thread is exhausted, another is tied on,
making practically a continuous length of thread going all along each
section and round every band. The weaver's knot is the best for
joining the lengths of thread. A simple way of tying it is shown at
fig. 31. A simple slip knot is made in the end of the new thread and
put over the end of the old, and, on being pulled tight, the old
thread should slip through, as shewn at B. The convenience of this
knot is, that by its use a firm attachment can be made quite close up
to the back of the book. This is a great advantage, as if the knot is
made at some distance from the back, it will have to be dragged
through the section two or three times, instead of only once. The
knot, after having been made, must be pulled inside the section, and
remain there. Considerable judgment is required in sewing. If a book
is sewn too loosely, it is almost impossible to bind it firmly; and if
too tightly, especially if the kettle stitches have been drawn too
tight, the thread may break in "backing," and the book have to be
resewn.

One way to avoid having too much swelling in the back of a book
consisting of a great many very thin sections is to sew "two sheets
on." In this form of sewing two sections at a time are laid on the
sewing-frame. The thread is inserted at the "kettle stitch" of the
lower section, and brought out as usual at the first cord, but instead
of being reinserted into the lower section, it is passed into the
upper one, and so on, alternately passing into the upper and lower
sections. This will give, if there are five bands, three stitches in
each section instead of six, as there would be if the sewing were
"all along," lessening the thread, consequently the swelling by half.
It is usual to sew the first and last few sections "all along."

The common method of sewing is to make saw cuts in the back, in which
thin cords can be sunk, and the thread merely passes behind them and
not round them, as in flexible sewing. This method, although very
quick and cheap, is not to be recommended, on account of the injury
done to the backs of the sections by the saw, and because the glue
running into the saw cuts is apt to make the back stiff, and to
prevent the book from opening right to the back. Indeed, were a
sawn-in book to open right to the back, as it is expected a
flexibly-sewn book will do, showing the sewing along the centre of
each section, the saw marks with the band inserted would show, and be
a serious disfigurement.

Medival books were usually sewn on double cords or strips of leather,
and the headband was often sewn at the same time, as shown at fig. 32,
A. This is an excellent method for very large books with heavy
sections, and is specially suitable for large vellum manuscripts, in
many of which the sections are very thick. An advantage of this
method is, that the twist round the double cord virtually makes a knot
at every band, and should a thread at any place break, there is no
danger of the rest of the thread coming loose. This is the only mode
of sewing by which a thread runs absolutely from end to end of the
sections. The headband sewn at the same time, and so tied down in
every section, is firmer and stronger than if worked on in the way now
usual. In the fifteenth century it was the custom to lace the ends of
the headbands into the boards in the same way as the other bands. This
method, while giving additional strength at the head and tail, and
avoiding the somewhat unfinished look of the cut-off ends of the
modern headband, is, on the whole, of doubtful advantage, as it is
necessary to cut the "turn in" at the point where strength in the
leather is much wanted.

At fig. 32 is shown in section the three methods of sewing mentioned.
A is the old sewing round double bands; with the headbands worked at
the same time with the same thread; B is the modern flexible sewing,
and C the common sawn-in method.

    [Illustration: FIG. 32.]

Books that are very thin or are to be bound in vellum, are best sewn
on tapes or vellum slips. The easiest way to set up the sewing-frame
for such sewing is to sling a piece of wood through two of the lay
cords, and to pin one end of the vellum or tape band round this, pull
the other end tight, and secure it with a drawing-pin underneath the
frame. The sewing, in the case of such flat bands, would not go round,
but only across them. To avoid undue looseness, every three or four
threads may be caught up at the back of the band, as shown in fig. 33.

    [Illustration: FIG. 33.]


                         MATERIALS FOR SEWING

The cord used should be of the best hemp, specially made with only two
strands of very long fibres to facilitate fraying out. For very large
books where a double cord is to be used, the best water line will be
found to answer, care being taken to select that which can be frayed
out. If tape is used it should be unbleached, such as the sailmakers
use. Thread should also be unbleached, as the unnecessary bleaching of
most bookbinder's sewing-thread seems to cause it to rot in a
comparatively short time. Silk of the best quality is better than any
thread. The ligature silk, undyed, as used by surgeons, is perhaps the
strongest material, and can be had in various thicknesses. It is
impossible to pay too great attention to the selection of sewing
materials, as the permanency of the binding depends on their
durability. The rebinding of valuable books is at best a necessary
evil, and anything that makes frequent rebinding necessary, is not
only objectionable on account of the cost involved, but because it
seriously shortens the life of the book.

Experience is required to judge what thickness of thread to use for
any given book. If the sections are very thin, a thin thread must be
used, or the "swelling" of the back caused by the additional thickness
of the thread in that part will be excessive, and make the book
unmanageable in "backing." On the other hand, if the sections are
large, and a too thin thread is used, there will not be enough
swelling to make a firm "joint." Broadly speaking, when there are a
great many very thin sections, the thinnest thread may be used; and
coarser thread may be used when the sections are thicker, or fewer in
number. In the case of large manuscripts on vellum it is best to use
very thick silk, or even catgut. Vellum is so tough and durable, that
any binding of a vellum book should be made as if it were expected to
last for hundreds of years.

In selecting the thickness of cord for a book, some judgment is
required. On an old book the bands are best made rather prominent by
the use of thick cord, but the exact thickness to be used is a matter
for taste and experience to decide.

A very thick band on a small book is clumsy, while a very thin band on
the back of a heavy book suggests weakness, and is therefore
unsightly.

In bindings of early printed books and manuscripts an appearance of
great strength is better than extreme neatness.

When the sewing is completed, the cords are cut off close to the lay
cords, and then the keys will be loose enough to be easily removed.
The knots remaining on the lay bands are removed, and the keys slung
through one of them.




                             CHAPTER VIII

          Fraying out Slips--Glueing up--Rounding and Backing


                   FRAYING OUT SLIPS AND GLUEING UP

After sewing, the book should be looked through to see that all sheets
and plates have been caught by the thread, and special attention
should be given to end papers to see that the sewing lies evenly.

The ends of the cords should next be cut off to within about two
inches of the book on each side, and the free portions frayed out. If
proper sewing cord is used, this will be found to be very easily done,
if a binder's bodkin is first inserted between the two strands,
separating them, and then again in the centre of each separated strand
to still further straighten the fibres (see fig. 34).

The fraying out of the thick cord recommended for heavy books is a
more difficult operation, but with a little trouble the fibres of any
good cord can be frayed out. Vellum or tape bands will only require
cutting off, leaving about two inches free on each side. The free
parts of the bands are called slips.

    [Illustration: FIG. 34.]

The book is now ready for glueing up. A piece of waste mill-board or
an old cloth cover is put on each side over the slips, and the book
knocked up squarely at the back and head. Then it is lowered into the
lying press and screwed up, leaving the back with the protecting
boards projecting about three-quarters of an inch. If the back has too
much swelling in it or is spongy, it is better to leave the slips on
one side free and to pull them as tight as possible while the book is
held in the press, or a knocking-down iron may be placed on one side
of the projecting back and the other side tapped with the backing
hammer to make the sections lie close to one another, and then the
slips pulled straight (fig. 35). The back must now be glued. The glue
for this operation must be hot, and not too thick. It is very
important that it should be worked well between the sections with the
brush, and it is well after it has been applied to rub the back with a
finger or folder to make quite sure that the glue goes between every
section for its entire length. If the book is too tightly screwed up
in the press, the glue is apt to remain too much on the surface; and
if not tightly enough, it may penetrate too deeply between the
sections. If the glue is thick, or stringy, it may be diluted with hot
water and the glue-brush rapidly spun round in the glue-pot to break
it up and to make it work freely.

    [Illustration: FIG. 35.]

Very great care is needed to see that the head of a previously trimmed
book is knocked up exactly square before the back is glued, for if it
is not, it will be very difficult to get it even afterwards.


                         ROUNDING AND BACKING

The amount of rounding on the back of a book should be determined by
the necessities of the case; that is to say, a back that has, through
guarding, or excess of sewing, a tendency to be round, is best not
forced to be flat, and a back that would naturally be flat, is best
not forced to be unduly round. A very round back is objectionable
where it can be avoided, because it takes up so much of the back
margins of the sheets, and is apt to make the book stiff in opening.
On the other hand, a back that is quite flat has to be lined up
stiffly, or it may become concave with use.

    [Illustration: FIG. 36.]

The method of rounding is to place the book with the back projecting a
little over the edge of the press or table, then to draw the back over
towards the workman, and, while in this position, to tap it carefully
with a hammer (see fig. 36). This is repeated on the other side of the
book, and, if properly done, will give the back an even, convex form
that should be in section, a portion of a circle. Rounding and backing
are best done after the glue has ceased to be tacky, but before it has
set hard.

    [Illustration: FIG. 37.]

Backing is perhaps the most difficult and important operation in
forwarding. The sewing threads in the back cause that part to be
thicker than the rest of the book. Thus in a book with twenty sections
there will be in the back, in addition to the thickness of the paper,
twenty thicknesses of thread.

If the boards were laced on to the book without rounding or backing,
and the book were pressed, the additional thickness of the back,
having to go somewhere, would cause it to go either convex or concave,
or else perhaps to crease up (see fig. 37). The object of rounding is
to control the distribution of this swelling, and to make the back
take an even and permanently convex form.

    [Illustration: FIG. 38.]

If the boards were merely laced on after rounding, there would be a
gap between the square ends of the board and the edge of the back (see
fig. 38), though the convexity and even curve of the back would be to
some extent assured. What is done in backing is to make a groove, into
which the edges of the board will fit neatly, and to hammer the backs
of the sections over one another from the centre outwards on both
sides to form the "groove," to ensure that the back shall return to
the same form after the book has been opened.

    [Illustration: FIG. 39.]

To back the book, backing boards are placed on each side (leaving the
slips outside) a short distance below the edge of the back (fig. 39).
The amount to leave here must be decided by the thickness of the
boards to be used. When the backing boards are in position, the book
and boards must be carefully lowered into the lying press and screwed
up very tight, great care being taken to see that the boards do not
slip, and that the book is put in evenly. Even the most experienced
forwarder will sometimes have to take a book out of the press two or
three times before he gets it in quite evenly and without allowing the
boards to slip. Unless the back has a perfectly even curve when put in
the press for backing, no amount of subsequent hammering will put it
permanently right.

    [Illustration: FIG. 40.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 41.]

The backs of the sections should be evenly fanned out one over the
other from the centre outwards on both sides. This is done by side
strokes of the hammer, in fact by a sort of "riveting" blow, and not
by a directly crushing blow (see fig. 41, in which the arrows show the
direction of the hammer strokes). If the sections are not evenly
fanned out from the centre, but are either zigzagged by being crushed
by direct blows of the hammer, as shown in fig. 42, A, or are unevenly
fanned over more to one side than the other, as shown in fig. 42, B,
the back, although it may be even enough when first done, will
probably become uneven with use. A book in which the sections have
been crushed down, as at fig. 42, A, will be disfigured inside by
creases in the paper.

    [Illustration: FIG. 42.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 43.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 44.]

It is a mistake to suppose that a very heavy hammer is necessary for
backing any but the largest books. For flexible books a hammer with a
comparatively small face should be used, as by its use the book can be
backed without flattening the bands. It is well to have a hammer head
of the shape shown in fig. 43. By using the thin end, the force of a
comparatively light blow, because concentrated on a small surface, is
effective.

At fig. 44 is shown an ordinary backing hammer.




                              CHAPTER IX

       Cutting and Attaching Boards--Cleaning off Back--Pressing


                     CUTTING AND ATTACHING BOARDS

The first quality of the best black board made from old rope is the
best to use for "extra" binding. It will be found to be very hard, and
not easily broken or bent at the corners. In selecting the thickness
suitable for any given book, the size and thickness of the volume
should be taken into account. The tendency of most modern binders is
to use a rather over thick board, perhaps with a view to bulk out the
volume. For manuscripts, or other books on vellum, it is best to use
wooden boards, which should be clasped. From their stability they form
a kind of permanent press, in which the vellum leaves are kept flat.
In a damp climate like that of England, vellum, absorbing moisture
from the atmosphere, soon cockles up unless it is held tightly in some
way; and when it is once cockled, the book cannot be made to shut
properly, except with very special treatment. Then also dust and damp
have ready access to the interstices of the crinkled pages, resulting
in the disfigurement so well known and so deplored by all lovers of
fine books.

For large books a "made" board, that is, two boards pasted together,
is better than a single board of the same thickness. In making boards
a thin and a thick board should be pasted together, the thin board to
go nearest the book. It will not be necessary to put a double lining
on the inside of such boards, as a thin board will always draw a thick
one.

    [Illustration: FIG. 45.]

If mill-boards are used they are first cut roughly to size with the
mill-board shears, screwed up in the "lying" press. The straight arm
of the shears is the one to fix in the press, for if the bent arm be
undermost, the knuckles are apt to be severely bruised against the
end. A better way of fixing the shears is shown at fig. 45. Any
blacksmith will bend the arm of the shears and make the necessary
clips. This method saves trouble and considerable wear and tear to
the "lying" press. Where a great many boards are needed, they may be
quickly cut in a board machine, but for "extra" work they should be
further trimmed in the plough, in the same way as those cut by the
shears. After the boards have been roughly cut to size, they should
have one edge cut straight with the plough. To do this one or two
pairs of boards are knocked up to the back and inserted in the cutting
side of the press, with those edges projecting which are to be cut
off, and behind them, as a "cut against," a board protected by a waste
piece of mill-board.

The plough, held by the screw and handle, and guided by the runners on
the press, is moved backwards and forwards. A slight turn of the screw
at each movement brings the knife forward. In cutting mill-boards
which are very hard, the screw should be turned very little each time.
If press and plough are in proper order, that part of the board which
projects above the cheek of the press should be cut off, leaving the
edges perfectly square and straight. If the edge of the press has been
damaged, or is out of "truth," a cutting board may be used between
the cheek of the press and the board to be cut, making a true edge for
the knife to run on.

    [Illustration: FIG. 46.--Lying or Cutting Press]

The position of the plough on the press is shown at fig. 46. The side
of the press with runners should be reserved for cutting, the other
side used for all other work.

    [Illustration: FIG. 47.]

The plough knife for mill-boards should not be ground at too acute an
angle, or the edge will most likely break away at the first cut. The
shape shown at fig. 47 is suitable. The knife should be very
frequently ground, as it soon gets blunt, which adds greatly to the
labour of cutting.

After an edge has been cut, each side should be well rubbed with a
folder to smooth down any burr left by the plough knife. Then a piece
of common paper with one edge cut straight is pasted on to one side of
the board, with the straight edge exactly up to the cut edge of the
board. Then a piece of paper large enough to cover both sides of the
board is pasted round it, and well rubbed down at the cut edge. After
having been lined, the boards are nipped in the press to ensure that
the lining paper shall stick. They are stood up to dry, with the
doubly lined side outwards. The double paper is intended to warp the
board slightly to that side, to compensate for the pull of the leather
when the book is covered. If the board is a double one, a single
lining paper will be sufficient, the thinner board helping to draw the
thicker. The paste for lining boards must be fairly thin, and very
well beaten up so as to be free from lumps. It is of the utmost
importance that the lining papers should stick properly, for unless
they stick, no subsequent covering of leather or paper can be made to
lie flat.

When the lined boards are quite dry, they should be paired with the
doubly lined sides together, and the top back corner marked to
correspond with the marks on the top back corners of the book. Then
near the top edge, with the aid of a carpenter's square, two points
are marked in a line at right angles to the cut edge. The pair of
boards is then knocked up to the back and lowered into the press as
before, so that the plough knife will exactly cut through the points.
The same operation is repeated on the two remaining uncut edges. In
marking out those for the fore-edge, the measurement is taken with a
pair of compasses (fig. 48) from the joint of the book to the
fore-edge of the first section. If the book has been trimmed, or is to
remain uncut, a little more must be allowed for the "squares," and if
it is to be cut in the plough, it must be now decided how much is to
be cut off, remembering that it is much better to have the boards a
little too large, and so have to reduce them after the book is cut,
than to have them too small, and either be obliged to get out a new
pair of boards, or unduly cut down the book.

    [Illustration: FIG. 48.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 49.]

The height of the boards for a book that has been trimmed, or is to
remain uncut, will be the height of the page with a small allowance at
each end for the squares. When a pair of boards has been cut all
round, it can be tested for squareness by reversing one board, when
any inequality that there may be will appear doubled. If the boards
are out of truth they should generally be put on one side, to be used
for a smaller book, and new boards got out. To correct a badly cut
pair of boards, it is necessary to reduce them in size, and the book
consequently suffers in proportion. If the boards have been found to
be truly cut, they are laid on the book, and the position of the slips
marked on them by lines at right angles to the back. A line is then
made parallel to the back, about half an inch in (see fig. 49). At the
points where the lines cross, a series of holes is punched from the
front with a binder's bodkin on a lead plate, then the board is turned
over, and a second series is punched from the back about half an inch
from the first. If the groove of the back is shallower than the
thickness of the board, the top back edge of the board should be
bevelled off with a file. This will not be necessary if the groove is
the exact depth. When the holes have been punched, it is well to cut a
series of V-shaped depressions from the first series of holes to the
back to receive the slips, or they may be too prominent when the book
is bound. It will now be necessary to considerably reduce the slips
that were frayed out after sewing, and to remove all glue or any other
matter attached to them. The extent to which they may be reduced is a
matter of nice judgment. In the desire to ensure absolute neatness in
the covering, modern binders often reduce the slips to almost nothing.
On the other hand, some go to the other extreme, and leave the cord
entire, making great ridges on the sides of the book where it is laced
in. It should be possible with the aid of the depressions, cut as
described, to use slips with sufficient margin of strength, and yet to
have no undue projection on the cover. A slight projection is not
unsightly, as it gives an assurance of sound construction and
strength, and, moreover, makes an excellent starting-point for any
pattern that may be used. When the slips have been scraped and
reduced, the portion left should consist of long straight silky
fibres. These must be well pasted, and the ends very slightly twisted.
The pointed ends are then threaded through the first series of holes
in the front of the board, and back again through the second (fig.
50). In lacing-in the slips must not be pulled so tight as to prevent
the board from shutting freely, nor left so loose as to make a
perceptible interval in the joint of the book. The pasted slips having
been laced in, their ends are cut off with a sharp knife, flush with
the surface of the board. The laced-in slips are then well hammered on
a knocking-down iron (see fig. 51), first from the front and then from
the back, care being taken that the hammer face should fall squarely,
or the slips may be cut. This should rivet them into the board,
leaving little or no projection. If in lacing in the fibres should
get twisted, no amount of hammering will make them flat, so that it is
important in pointing the ends for lacing in, that only the points are
twisted just sufficiently to facilitate the threading through the
holes, and not enough to twist the whole slip.

    [Illustration: FIG. 50.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 51.]

To lace slips into wooden boards, holes are made with a brace and fine
twist bit, and the ends of the frayed out slips may be secured with a
wooden plug (see fig. 52).

Old books were sometimes sewn on bands of leather, but as those sewn
on cord seem to have lasted on the whole much better, and as,
moreover, modern cord is a far more trustworthy material than modern
leather, it is better to use cord for any books bound now.

    [Illustration: FIG. 52.]


                  CLEANING OFF THE BACK AND PRESSING

    [Illustration: FIG. 53.]

When the boards have been laced on and the slips hammered down, the
book should be pressed. Before pressing, a tin is put on each side of
both boards, one being pushed right up into the joint on the inside,
and the other up to the joint, or a little over it, on the outside.
While in the press, the back should be covered with paste and left to
soak for a few minutes. When the glue is soft the surplus on the
surface can be scraped off with a piece of wood shaped as shown in
fig. 53. For important books it is best to do this in the lying press,
but some binders prefer first to build up the books in the standing
press, and then to paste the backs and clean them off there. This has
the advantage of being a quicker method, and will, in many cases,
answer quite well. But for books that require nice adjustment it will
be found better to clean off each volume separately in the lying
press, and afterwards to build up the books and boards in the
standing press, putting the larger books at the bottom. It must be
seen that the entire pile is exactly in the centre under the screw, or
the pressure will be uneven. To ascertain if the books are built up
truly, the pile must be examined from both the front and side of the
press. Each volume must also be looked at carefully to see that it
lies evenly, and that the back is not twisted or out of shape. This is
important, as any form given to the book when it is pressed at this
stage will be permanent.

Any coloured or newly printed plates will need tissues, as in the
former pressing; and any folded plates or diagrams or inserted letters
will need a thin tin on each side of them to prevent them from marking
the book.

Again, the pressure on hand-printed books must not be excessive.

The books should be left in the press at least a night. When taken out
they will be ready for headbanding, unless the edges are to be cut in
boards.




                               CHAPTER X

            Cutting in Boards--Gilding and Colouring Edges


                           CUTTING IN BOARDS

The knife for cutting edges may be ground more acutely than for
cutting boards, and should be very sharp, or the paper may be torn.
The plough knife should never be ground on the under side, as if the
under side is not quite flat, it will tend to run up instead of
cutting straight across. Before beginning to cut edges, the position
of the knife should be tested carefully by screwing the plough up,
with the press a little open, and noting whereabouts on the left-hand
cheek the point of the knife comes. In a press that is true the knife
should just clear the edge of the press. If there is too much packing
the knife will cut below the edge of the press, and if too little, it
will cut above.

"Packing" is paper inserted between the knife and the metal plate on
the plough, to correct the position of the knife. When by experiment
the exact thickness of paper necessary for any given knife is found,
the packing should be carefully kept when the knife is taken out for
grinding, and put back with it into the plough.

The first edge to be cut is the top, and the first thing to do is to
place the boards in the position they will hold when the book is
bound. The front board is then dropped the depth of the square
required, care being taken that the back edge of the board remains
evenly in the joint. A piece of cardboard, or two or three thicknesses
of paper, are then slipped in between the end paper and the back board
to prevent the latter from being cut by the knife. The book is then
carefully lowered into the press, with the back towards the workman,
until the top edge of the front board is exactly even with the
right-hand cheek, and the press screwed up evenly. The back board
should show the depth of the square above the left-hand cheek. It is
very important that the edge of the back board should be exactly
parallel with the press, and if at first it is not so, the book must
be twisted until it is right.

The edges can now be cut with the plough as in cutting mill-boards.
The tail of the book is cut in the same way, still keeping the back
of the book towards the workman, but cutting from the back board.

    [Illustration: FIG. 54.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 55.]

Cutting the fore-edge is more difficult. The waste sheets at each end
of the book should be cut off flush with the edge of the board, and
marks made on them below the edge showing the amount of the square,
and consequently how much is to be cut off. The curve of the back, and
consequent curve of the fore-edge, must first be got rid of, by
inserting a pair of pieces of flat steel called "trindles" (fig. 54)
across the back, from the inside of the boards. When these are
inserted the back must be knocked quite flat, and, in the case of a
heavy book, a piece of tape may be tied round the leaves (see fig. 55)
to keep them in position. A pair of cutting boards is placed one on
each side of the leaves, the back one exactly up to the point that the
edge of the board came to, and the front one as much below that point
as it is desired the square of the fore-edge should be. The trindles
are removed while the book is held firmly between the cutting boards
by the finger and thumb; book and boards are then lowered very
carefully into the press. The top edge of the front cutting board
should be flush with the right-hand cheek of the press, and that of
the back a square above the left-hand cheek (see fig. 56). A further
test is to look along the surface of the right-hand cheek, when, if
the book has been inserted truly, the amount of the back cutting board
in sight should exactly correspond with the amount of the paper to be
cut showing above the front board. It will also be necessary before
cutting to look at the back, and to see that it has remained flat. If
it has gone back to its old curve, or the book has been put into the
press crookedly, it must be taken right out again and the trindles
inserted afresh, as it is usually a waste of time to try to adjust the
book when it is in the press. The leaves are cut in the same way as
those of the head and tail.

    [Illustration: FIG. 56.]


             GILDING OR COLOURING THE EDGES OF A CUT BOOK

Gilding the edges of a book cut in boards is much the same process as
that described for the trimmed book, excepting that when gilt in
boards the edges can be scraped and slightly sand-papered. It is the
custom to admire a perfectly solid gilt edge, looking more like a
solid sheet of metal, than the leaves of a book. As the essential
characteristic of a book is, that it is composed of leaves, this fact
is better accepted and emphasised by leaving the edges a little rough,
so that even when gilt they are evidently the edges of leaves of
paper, and not the sides of a block, or of something solid.

To gild the edges of a cut book the boards should be turned back, and
cutting boards put on each side of the book flush with the edge to be
gilt. For the fore-edge the book must be thrown up with trindles
first, unless it is desired to gild in the round, a process which
gives the objectionable solid metallic edge.

After the edges have been gilt they may be decorated by tooling,
called "gauffering."

This may be done, either by tooling with hot tools directly on the
gold while the leaves are screwed up tightly in the press, or by
laying another coloured gold on the top of the first and tooling over
that, leaving the pattern in the new gold on the original colour. But,
to my mind, edges are best left undecorated, except for plain gold or
colour.

If the edges are to be coloured, they should be slightly scraped, and
the colour put on with a sponge, commencing with the fore-edge, which
should be slightly fanned out, and held firmly, by placing a
pressing-board above it, and pressing with the hand on this. The
colour must be put on very thinly, commencing from the centre of the
fore-edge and working to either end, and as many coats put on as are
necessary to get the depth of colour required. The head and tail are
treated in the same way, excepting that they cannot be fanned out, and
the colour should be applied from the back to the fore-edge. If in the
fore-edge an attempt is made to colour from one end to the other, and
if in the head or tail from the fore-edge to the back, the result will
almost certainly be that the sponge will leave a thick deposit of
colour round the corner from which it starts.

For colouring edges almost any stain will answer, or ordinary
water-colours may be used if moistened with size.

When the colour is dry the edge should be lightly rubbed over with a
little beeswax, and burnished with a tooth burnisher (see fig. 57).

    [Illustration: FIG. 57.]

In addition to plain colour and gilding, the edges of a book may be
decorated in a variety of ways. The fore-edge may be fanned out and
painted in any device in water-colour and afterwards gilded; the
painting will only show when the book is open. The fore-edge for this
must be cut very solid, and if the paper is at all absorbent, must be
sized with vellum size before being painted. The paints used must be
simple water-colour, and the edge must not be touched with the hand
before gilding, as if there is any grease or finger-mark on it, the
gold will not stick evenly. Painting on the fore-edge should only be
attempted when the paper of the book is thin and of good quality. More
common methods of decorating edges are by marbling and sprinkling, but
they are both inferior to plain colouring. Some pleasant effects are
sometimes obtained by marbling edges and then gilding over the
marbling.




                              CHAPTER XI

                              Headbanding


                               HEADBANDS

Modern headbands are small pieces of vellum, gut, or cord sewn on to
the head and tail of a book with silk or thread. They resist the
strain on the book when it is taken from the shelf. The vellum slip or
cord must be of such a depth, that when covered with silk it will be
slightly lower than the square of the boards. The cut edge of the
vellum always slants, and the slip must be placed in position so that
it tilts back rather than forward on the book.

To start, ease the boards slightly on the slips and pull them down
with the top edges flush with the top edge of the leaves. If this is
not done the silk catches on the projecting edges as the band is
worked. Stand the book in a finishing press, fore-edge to the worker,
and tilted forward so as to give a good view of the headband as it is
worked. The light must come from the left, and well on to the work. A
needle threaded with silk is put in at the head of the book, and
through the centre of the first section after the end papers, and
drawn out at the back below the kettle stitch with about two-thirds of
the silk. The needle is again inserted in the same place, and drawn
through until a loop of silk is left. The vellum slip is placed in the
loop, with the end projecting slightly to the left. It must be held
steady by a needle placed vertically behind it, with its point between
the leaves of the first section. The needle end of silk is then behind
the headband, and the shorter end in front. The needle end is brought
over from the back with the right hand, passed into the left hand, and
held taut. The short end is picked up with the right hand, brought
over the needle end under the vellum, and pulled tight from the back.
This is repeated; the back thread is again drawn up and over the band
to the front, the needle end crosses it, and is drawn behind under the
vellum slip, and so on. The crossing of the threads form a "bead,"
which must be watched, and kept as tight as possible, and well down on
the leaves of the book. Whenever the vellum or string begins to shift
in position, it must be tied down. This is done when the needle end of
silk is at the back. A finger of the left hand is placed on the thread
of silk at the back, and holds it firmly just below the slip. The
needle end is then brought up and over the slip, but instead of
crossing it with the front thread, the needle is passed between the
leaves and out at the back of the book, below the kettle stitch, and
the thread gradually drawn tight, and from under the left-hand finger.
The loop so made will hold the band firmly, and the silk can then be
brought up and over the slip and crossed in the usual way. The band
should be worked as far as the end papers, and should be finished with
a double "tie down," after which the front thread is drawn under the
slip to the back. Both the ends of silk are then cut off to about half
an inch, frayed out, and pasted down as flatly as possible on the back
of the book.

The band should be tied down frequently. It is not too much to tie
down every third time the needle end of the silk comes to the back.
To make good headbands the pull on the silk must be even throughout.

When the ends of the silk are pasted down, the ends of the vellum slip
are cut off as near the silk as possible. The correct length of the
headband is best judged by pressing the boards together with thumb and
finger at the opposite ends of the band, so as to compress the
sections into their final compass. If the band then buckles in the
least, it is too long and must be shortened.

The medival headbands were sewn with the other bands (see fig. 32),
and were very strong, as they were tied down at every section. Modern
worked headbands, although not so strong, are, if frequently tied
down, strong enough to resist any reasonable strain. There are many
other ways of headbanding, but if the one described is mastered, the
various other patterns will suggest themselves if variety is needed.
For very large books a double headband may be worked on two pieces of
gut or string--a thick piece with a thin piece in front. The string
should first be soaked in thin glue and left to dry. Such a band is
worked with a figure of eight stitch. Headbands may also be worked
with two or three shades of silk. As vellum is apt to get hard and to
break when it is used for headbanding, it is well to paste two pieces
together with linen in between, and to cut into strips as required.

Machine-made headbands can be bought by the yard. Such bands are
merely glued on, but as they have but little strength, should not be
used.

Where leather joints are used, the headbands may be worked on pieces
of soft leather sized and screwed up. If the ends are left long and
tied in front while the book is being covered, they may be
conveniently let into grooves in the boards before the leather joint
is pasted down. This method, I think, has little constructive value,
but it certainly avoids the rather unfinished look of the cut-off
headband.




                              CHAPTER XII

       Preparing for Covering--Paring Leather--Covering--Mitring
                      Corners--Filling-in Boards


                        PREPARING FOR COVERING

After the headband is worked, a piece of brown or other stout paper
should be well glued on at the head and tail, care being taken that it
is firmly attached to the back and the headband. When dry, the part
projecting above the headband is neatly cut off, and the part on the
back well sand-papered, to remove any irregularity caused by the
tie-downs attaching the headband. For most books this will be quite
sufficient lining up, but very heavy books are best further lined up
between the bands with linen, or thin leather. This can be put on by
pasting the linen or leather and giving the back a very thin coat of
glue.

The only thing now left to do before covering will be to set the
squares and to cut off a small piece of the back corner of each board
at the head and tail, to make it possible for the boards to open and
shut without dragging the head-cap out of place. The form of the
little piece to be cut off varies with each individual binder, but I
have found for an octavo book that a cut slightly sloping from the
inside cutting off the corner about an eighth of an inch each way,
gives the best result (see fig. 58). When the corner has been cut off,
the boards should be thrown back, and the slips between the book and
the board well pasted. When these have soaked a little, the squares of
the boards are set; that is, the boards are fixed so that exactly the
same square shows on each board above head and tail. A little larger
square is sometimes an advantage at the tail to keep the head-cap well
off the shelf, the essential thing being that both head and both tail
squares should be the same. In the case of an old book that has not
been recut, the edges will often be found to be uneven. In such cases
the boards must be made square, and so set that the book stands up
straight.

    [Illustration: FIG. 58.]

When the slips have been pasted and the squares set, tins can be put
inside and outside the boards, and the book given a slight nip in the
press to flatten the slips. Only a comparatively light pressure should
be given, or the lining up of the headbands or back will become
cockled and detached.


                            PARING LEATHER

While the slips are being set in the press the cover can be got out.
Judgment is necessary in cutting out covers. One workman will be able,
by careful cutting, to get six covers out of a skin where another will
only get four. The firm part of the skin is the back and sides, and
this only should be used for the best books. The fleshy parts on the
flanks and belly will not wear sufficiently well to be suitable for
good bookbinding.

The skin should be cut out leaving about an inch all round for turning
in when the book is covered, and when cut out it must be pared. If the
leather is of European manufacture most of the paring will have been
done before it is sold, and the leather manufacturer will have shaved
it to any thickness required. This is a convenience that is partly
responsible for the unduly thin leather that is commonly used. The
better plan is to get the leather rather thick, and for the binder to
pare it down where necessary. For small books it is essential, in
order that the covers may open freely, and the boards not look clumsy,
that the leather should be very thin at the joint and round the edges
of the boards. For such books it is very important that a small,
naturally thin skin should be used that will not have to be unduly
pared down, and that the large and thicker skins should be kept for
large books.

Binders like using large skins because there is much less waste, but
if these skins are used for small books, so much of the leather
substance has to be pared away, that only the comparatively brittle
grained surface remains. By the modern process of dyeing this surface
is often to some extent injured, and its strength sometimes totally
destroyed.

When the cover has been cut to size the book is laid on it with the
boards open, and a pencil line drawn round them, a mark being made to
show where the back comes. The skin is then pared, making it thin
where the edge of the boards will come. Great care must be taken that
the thinning does not commence too abruptly, or a ridge will be
apparent when the leather is on the book.

The paring must be done quite smoothly and evenly. Every unevenness
shows when the cover is polished and pressed. Care is needed in
estimating the amount that will have to be pared off that part of the
leather that covers the back and joints. The object of the binder
should be to leave these portions as thick as he can consistently with
the free opening of the boards. The leather at the head-caps must be
pared quite thin, as the double thickness on the top of the headband
is apt to make this part project above the edges of the board. This is
a great trouble, especially at the tail, where, if the head-cap
projects beyond the boards, the whole weight of the book rests on it,
and it is certain to be rubbed off when the book is put on the shelf.

    [Illustration: FIG. 59.]

The method of paring with a French knife (fig. 60, A)--the only form
of knife in use by binders that gives sufficient control over the
leather--is shown at fig. 59. To use this knife properly, practice is
required. The main thing to learn is that the knife must be used quite
flat, and made to cut by having a very slight burr on the under
side. This burr is got by rubbing the knife on the lithographic stone
on which the paring is done. The handle of the knife should never be
raised to such a height above the surface of the stone that it is
possible to get the under fingers of the right hand over the edge of
the stone. Another form of knife suitable for paring the edges of
leather is shown at fig. 60, B.

    [Illustration: FIG. 60.]

To test if the leather has been sufficiently pared, fold it over where
the edge of the board will come, and run the finger along the folded
leather. If the paring has been done properly it will feel quite even
the whole length of the fold; but if there are any irregularities,
they will be very apparent, and the paring must be gone over again
till they have disappeared. When even, the book must be again laid on
the leather with the boards open, and a pencil line drawn round as
before. If there are leather joints they will have been pared before
the book was sewn, and care must be taken in paring the turn-in of the
cover that it is of the same thickness as the leather joint, or it
will be impossible to make a neat mitre at the back corners.


                               COVERING

Before covering, the book must be looked at to see that the bands are
quite square and at equal distances apart. Any slight errors in this
respect can be corrected by holding the book in the lying press
between backing boards and gently tapping the bands from one side or
the other with a piece of wood struck with a hammer. This is best done
when the back is cleaned off, but by damping the bands slightly it may
be done just before covering. The squares must be looked to, and the
edges of the board well rubbed with a folder, or tapped with a hammer,
to remove any burr that may have been caused by the plough knife, or
any chance blow. The back is then moistened with paste, or, in the
case of a very large book, with thin glue, and left to soak. The cover
can then be well pasted with thickish paste, that has been previously
well beaten up. When the cover is pasted, it can be folded with the
pasted sides together and left to soak for a few minutes while the
back is again looked to, and any roughness smoothed down with the
folder. Before covering, the bands should be nipped up with band
nippers (see fig. 61) to make sure that they are sharp. The coverer
should have ready before covering a clean paring stone, one or two
folders, a pair of nickeled-band nippers, a clean sponge, a little
water in a saucer, a piece of thread, and a strip of smooth wood
(boxwood for preference), called a band stick, used for smoothing the
leather between the bands, a pair of scissors, and a small sharp
knife, a pair of waterproof sheets the size of the book, and, if the
book is a large one, a pair of tying up boards, with tying up string,
and two strips of wood covered in blotting-paper or leather. It is
best to have the band nippers for covering nickeled to prevent the
iron from staining the leather. The waterproof sheets recommended are
thin sheets of celluloid, such as are used by photographers.

    [Illustration: FIG. 61.]

When these things are ready, the pasted cover should be examined and
repasted if it has dried in any place. The amount of paste to be used
for covering can only be learned by experience. A thick leather will
take more than a thin one, but, provided the cover sticks tight at
every point, the less paste used the better. If there is too much, it
will rub up and make very ugly, uneven places under the leather; and
if there is too little, the cover will not stick.

    [Illustration: FIG. 62.]

Take the pasted cover and look to see which is the better side of the
leather. Lay the front of the book down on this exactly up to the
marks that show the beginning of the turn-in. Then draw the leather
over the back and on to the other side, pulling it slightly, but not
dragging it. Then stand the book on its fore-edge on a piece of waste
paper, with the leather turned out on either side, as shown at fig.
62, and nip up the bands with nickeled band nippers (see fig. 63).
After this is done there will probably be a good deal of loose leather
on the back. This can be got rid of by dragging the leather on to the
side; but by far the better plan, when the back is large enough to
allow it, is to work up the surplus leather on to the back between the
panels. This requires a good deal of practice, and is very seldom
done; but it can be done with most satisfactory results. The book
should now have the leather on the back stretched lengthways to make
it cover the bands, but not stretched the other way, and the leather
on the boards should lie perfectly flat and not be stretched at all.
The leather on the fore-edge of the board is then rubbed with the hand
on the outside, and then on to the edge, and then on the inside. The
edge and the inside are smoothed down with a folder, and any excessive
paste on the inside squeezed out and removed. When the fore-edge of
both boards has been turned in, the head and tail must also be turned
in. A little paste is put on to that part of the leather that will
turn in below the headband, and this portion is neatly tucked in
between the boards and the back. The turned-in edge must lie quite
evenly, or it will result in a ridge on the back. The leather is
turned in on the two boards in the same way as described for the
fore-edge, and the edge rubbed square with a folder. At fig. 64 is
shown a convenient form of folder for covering. At the corners the
leather must be pulled over as far as possible with two folders
meeting at the extreme point, the object being to avoid a cut in the
leather at the corner of the board. The folds so formed must be cut
off with the scissors (see fig. 65, A), then one edge tucked neatly
under the other, (B). Care must be taken throughout not to soil the
edges of the leaves.

    [Illustration: FIG. 63.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 64.]

At the headband the fold of leather, pared thin for the purpose, must
be squeezed together with a folder and pulled out a little to leave an
even projection that can be turned over to form a head-cap. When both
ends have been turned in, in this way, the boards must each be opened
and pressed against a straight-edge held in the joint (fig. 66) to
ensure that there is enough leather in the turn-in of the joint to
allow the cover to open freely; and the leather of the turn-in at the
head and tail must be carefully smoothed down with a folder.

    [Illustration: FIG. 65.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 66.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 67.]

The book may now be shut up if a waterproof sheet is put at each end
to prevent the damp of the cover from cockling the paper. It must then
be stood on its fore-edge and the bands again nipped up with a pair of
nickeled band nippers, and the panels between the bands well pressed
down with the band stick to cause the leather to stick at every point.
A piece of thread is tied round the back from head to tail, squeezing
the leather in the gap caused by the corners of the board having been
cut off. The book is then turned up on end, resting the tail on a
folder or anything that will keep the projecting leather for the
head-cap from being prematurely flattened. The head-caps (fig. 67)
must now be set. To do this the first finger of the left hand is
placed behind it, and a sharp folder is pressed into the corners of
the head-cap between the headband and the thread. The leather is then
tapped over the headband, and the whole turned over on the stone and
rubbed at the back with a folder. This operation requires great
nicety. The shape of head-cap is shown at fig. 67. The nice adjustment
of head-caps and corners, although of no constructional value, are the
points by which the forwarding of a book is generally valued.

    [Illustration: FIG. 68.]

If the book is a large one, it will be best to tie it up. The method
of tying up is shown in fig. 68. The tying up cords will make marks at
the side of the bands, that are not unpleasant on a large book. If
they are objected to, it is best to tie the book up for about
half-an-hour, and then to untie it, and smooth out the marks with the
band stick. Even with small books, if the leather seems inclined to
give trouble, it is well to tie them up for a short time, then to
untie them, to smooth out any marks or inequalities, and to tie them
up again.


                    MITRING CORNERS AND FILLING IN

A book that has been covered should be left under a light weight until
the next day, with waterproof sheets between the damp cover and the
end paper to prevent the sheets of the book from cockling through the
damp. When the cover is thoroughly set the boards should be carefully
opened, pressing them slightly to the joint to ensure a square and
even joint. If, as is sometimes the case, the turn-in of the leather
over the joint seems to be inclined to bind, the cover should be
merely opened half-way, and the leather of the turns-in of the joint
damped with a sponge, and left to soak for a short time, and then the
cover can usually be opened without any dragging. A section of a good
joint is shown at fig. 69, A, and a bad one at B.

    [Illustration: FIG. 69.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 70.]

The next operation will be to fill in the board and mitre the corners.
To fill in the boards, a piece of paper as thick as the turn-in of the
leather (engineer's cartridge paper answers very well) should be cut a
little smaller than the board, with one edge cut straight; then with
the straight edge adjusted to the back of the board, and a weight
placed on the centre, the paper is marked round with dividers set to
the intended width of the turn-in of the leather. Then with a sharp
knife, paper and leather may be cut through together. The paper should
then be marked to show its position on the board, and the ragged edges
of the leather trimmed off. This will leave an even margin of leather
on three sides of the inside of the board, and a piece of paper that
will exactly fit the remaining space. The corners must next be
mitred. To do this, both thicknesses of leather are cut through from
the corner of the board to the corner of the inside margin. The knife
should be held slightly slanting to make a cut, as shown at fig. 70.
The corners should then be thoroughly damped, and the overlapping
leather from both sides removed, leaving what should be a neat and
straight join. If the leather at the extreme corner should prove to
be, as is often the case, too thick to turn in neatly, the corners
should be opened out and the leather pared against the thumb nail, and
then well pasted and turned back again. The extreme corner may be
slightly tapped on the stone with a hammer, and the sides rubbed with
a folder, to ensure squareness and sharpness. When all four corners
have been mitred, the filling in papers can be pasted in. As they will
probably stretch a little with the paste, it will be well to cut off a
slight shaving, and they should then fit exactly. When the boards have
been filled in and well rubbed down, the book should be left for some
hours with the boards standing open to enable the filling-in papers to
draw the boards slightly inwards to overcome the pull of the leather.

In cases where there are leather joints the operation is as follows:
The waste end paper is removed, and the edge of the board and joint
carefully cleaned from glue and all irregularities, and if, as is most
likely, it is curved from the pull of the leather, the board must be
tapped or ironed down until it is perfectly straight. If there is
difficulty in making the board lie straight along the joint before
pasting down, it will be well first to fill in with a well pasted and
stretched thin paper, which, if the boards are left open, will draw
them inwards. If the leather joint is pasted down while the board is
curved, the result will be a most unsightly projection on the outside.
When the joint has been cleaned out, and the board made to lie flat,
the leather should be pasted down and mitred. The whole depth of the
turn-in of the covering leather in the joint must not be removed, or
it will be unduly weakened. The mitring line should not come from the
extreme corner, but rather farther down, and there it is well to
leave a certain amount of overlap in the joint, for which purpose the
edge of the turn-in leather and the edge of the leather joint should
be pared thin. After pasting down the leather joints the boards should
be left open till they are dry (see fig. 71). The turn-in and leather
joint are then trimmed out, leaving an even margin of leather all
round the inside of the board, and the panel in the centre filled in
with a piece of thick paper.

    [Illustration: FIG. 71.]

When corners and filling in are dry, the boards may be shut up, and
the book is ready for finishing.

It is a common practice to wash up the covers of books that have
become stained with a solution of oxalic acid in water. This is a
dangerous thing to do, and is likely to seriously injure the leather.
Leather, when damp, must not be brought in contact with iron or steel
tools, or it may be badly stained.




                             CHAPTER XIII

   Library Binding--Binding very Thin Books--Scrap-Books--Binding on
                 Vellum--Books covered with Embroidery


                            LIBRARY BINDING

                      _Specifications III and IV_

To produce cheaper bindings, as must be done in the case of large
libraries, some alteration of design is necessary. Appearance must to
some extent be sacrificed to strength and durability, and not, as is
too often the case, strength and durability sacrificed to appearance.
The essentials of any good binding are, that the sections should be
sound in themselves, and that there should be no plates or odd sheets
"pasted on," or anything that would prevent any leaf from opening
right to the back; the sewing must be thoroughly sound; the sewing
materials of good quality; the slips firmly attached to the boards;
and the leather fairly thick and of a durable kind, although for the
sake of cheapness it may be necessary to use skins with flaws on the
surface. Such flawed skins cost half, or less than half, the price of
perfect skins, and surface flaws do not injure the strength of the
leather. By sewing on tape, great flexibility of the back is obtained,
and much time, and consequent expense, in covering is saved. By using
a French joint much thicker leather than usual can be used, with
corresponding gain in strength.

To bind an octavo or smaller book according to the specification given
(III, page 307); first make all sections sound, and guard all plates
or maps. Make end papers with zigzags. After the sections have been
thoroughly pressed, the book will be ready for marking up and sewing.
In marking up for sewing on tapes, two marks will be necessary for
each tape. When there are several books of the same size to be sewn,
they may be placed one above the other in the sewing press, and sewn
on to the same tapes. It will be found that the volumes when sewn can
easily be slid along the tapes, which must be long enough to provide
sufficient for the slips of each. The split boards may be "made" of a
thin black mill-board with a thicker straw-board. To "make" a pair of
split boards the pieces of straw-and mill-board large enough to make
the two are got out, and the straw-board well glued, except in the
centre, which should previously be covered with a strip of thin
mill-board or tin about four inches wide. The strip is then removed,
and the thin black board laid on the glued straw-board and nipped in
the press. When dry, the made board is cut down the centre, which will
leave two boards glued together all over except for two inches on one
side of each. The boards then are squared to the book in a mill-board
machine. The back of the book is glued up, and in the ordinary way
rounded and backed. The edges may be cut with a guillotine. The ends
of the tapes are glued on the waste end paper, which should be cut off
about an inch and a half from the back. The split boards are then
opened and glued, and the waste end papers with slips attached are
placed in them (see fig. 72), and the book nipped in the press. To
form a "French joint" the boards should be kept about an eighth of an
inch from the back of the book. The book is then ready for covering.
The leather must not be pared too thin, as the French joint will give
plenty of play and allow the use of much thicker leather than usual.
If time and money can be spared, headbands can be worked, but they are
not absolutely necessary, and a piece of string may be inserted into
the turning of the leather at head and tail in the place of them. When
the book is covered, a piece of string should be tied round the
joints, and the whole given a nip in the press. The corners of the
boards should be protected by small tips of vellum or parchment. The
sides may be covered with good paper, which will wear quite as well as
cloth, look better, and cost less.

    [Illustration: FIG. 72.]

The lettering of library books is very important (see Chapter XV).


                        BINDING VERY THIN BOOKS

Books consisting of only one section may be bound as follows:--A sheet
of paper to match the book, and two coloured sheets for end papers,
are folded round the section, and a "waste" paper put over all. A
strip of linen is pasted to the back of the waste, and the whole sewn
together by stitching through the fold. The waste may be cut off and
inserted with the linen in a split board, as for library bindings. The
back edges of the board should be filed thin, and should not be placed
quite up to the back, to allow for a little play in the joints.

The leather is put on in the ordinary way, except that the linen at
the head and tail must be slit a little to allow for the turn in. If
waterproof sheets are first inserted, the ends may be pasted, the
boards shut, and the book nipped in the press. By substituting a piece
of thin leather for the outside coloured paper, a leather joint can be
made.


                              SCRAP-BOOKS

Scrap-books, into which autograph letters, sketches, or other papers
can be pasted, may be made as follows:--Enough paper of good quality
is folded up to the size desired, and pieces of the same paper, of the
same height, and about two inches wide, are folded down the centre and
inserted between the backs of the larger sheets, as shown at fig. 73.
It is best not to insert these smaller pieces in the centre of the
section, as they would be troublesome in sewing. If, after sewing, the
book is filled up with waste paper laid between the leaves, it will
make it manageable while being forwarded.

It is best to use a rather darkly-toned or coloured paper, as, if a
quite white paper is used, any letters or papers that have become
soiled, will look unduly dirty.

    [Illustration: FIG. 73.]

Autograph letters may be mounted in the following ways:--If the letter
is written upon both sides of a single leaf, it may be either
"inlaid," or guarded, as shown at fig. 74, A. A letter on a folded
sheet of notepaper should have the folds strengthened with a guard of
strong thin paper, and be attached by a guard made, as shown at fig.
74, B; or if on very heavy paper, by a double guard, as shown at fig.
74, C. Torn edges of letters may be strengthened with thin Japanese
paper.

    [Illustration: FIG. 74.]

Thin paper, written or printed only on one side, may be mounted on a
page of the book. It is better to attach these by their extreme edges
only, as if pasted down all over they may cause the leaves to curl up.

Letters or any writing or drawing in lead pencil should be fixed with
size before being inserted.

Silver prints of photographs are best mounted with some very
quick-drying paste, such as that sold for the purpose by the
photographic dealers. If the leaf on which they are mounted is
slightly damped before the photograph is pasted down, it will be less
likely to cockle. If this is done, waterproof sheets should be put on
each side of the leaf while it dries. If photographs are attached by
the edges only, they will not be so liable to draw the paper on which
they are mounted; but sometimes they will not lie flat themselves.

In cases where very thick letters or papers have to be pasted in, a
few more leaves of the book should be cut out, to make a corresponding
thickness at the back.


                            VELLUM BINDINGS

Vellum covers may be limp without boards, and merely held in place by
the slips being laced through them, or they may be pasted down on
boards in much the same way as leather.

If the edges of a book for limp vellum binding are to be trimmed or
gilt, that should be done before sewing. For the ends a folded piece
of thin vellum may replace the paste-down paper. The sewing should be
on strips of vellum. The back is left square after glueing, and
headbands are worked as for leather binding, or may be worked on
strips of leather, with ends left long enough to lace into the vellum
(see p. 151). The back and headbands are lined with leather, and the
book is ready for the cover.

A piece of vellum should be cut out large enough to cover the book,
and to leave a margin of an inch and a half all round. This is marked
with a folder on the under side, as shown at fig. 75, A. Spaces 1 and
2 are the size of the sides of the book with surrounding squares;
space 3 is the width of the back, and space 4 the width for the
overlaps on the fore-edge. The corners are cut, as shown at 5, and the
edges are folded over, as at B. The overlap 4 is then turned over, and
the back folded, as at C. The slips are now laced through slits made
in the vellum.

    [Illustration: FIG. 75.]

A piece of loose, toned paper may be put inside the cover to prevent
any marks on the book from showing through; and pieces of silk ribbon
of good quality are laced in as shown, going through both cover and
vellum ends, if there are any, and are left with ends long enough to
tie (see fig. 76).

    [Illustration: FIG. 76.]

If paper ends are used, the silk tape need only be laced through the
cover, and the end paper pasted over it on the inside.

Another simple way of keeping a vellum book shut is shown at fig. 77.
A bead is attached to a piece of gut laced into the vellum, and a loop
of catgut is laced in the other side, and looped over the bead as
shown.

If the book is to have stiff boards, and the vellum is to be pasted
to them, it is best to sew the sections on tapes or vellum slips, to
back the book as for leather, and to insert the ends of the slips in a
split board, leaving a French joint, as described for library
bindings. Vellum is very stiff, and, if it is pasted directly to the
back, the book would be hard to open. It is best in this case to use
what is known as a hollow back.

    [Illustration: FIG. 77.]

To make a hollow back, a piece of stout paper is taken which measures
once the length of the back and three times the width. This is folded
in three. The centre portion is glued to the back and well rubbed
down, and the overlapping edges turned back and glued one to the other
(fig. 78). This will leave a flat, hollow casing, formed by the single
paper glued to the back of the book and the double paper to which the
vellum may be attached. Or it is better to line up the back with
leather, and to place a piece of thick paper the size of the back on
to the pasted vellum where the back will be when the book is covered.

When the book is ready for covering, the vellum should be cut out and
lined with paper. In lining vellum the paste must be free from lumps,
and great care must be taken not to leave brush marks. To avoid this,
when the lining paper has been pasted it can be laid, paste downwards,
on a piece of waste paper and quickly pulled up again; this should
remove surplus paste and get rid of any marks left by the brush. When
the vellum has been lined with paper, it should be given a light nip
in the press between blotting-paper, and while still damp it is
pasted, the book covered, and the corners mitred. A piece of thin
string is tied round the head-caps and pressed into the French joint.

    [Illustration: FIG. 78.]

Waterproof sheets are placed inside the covers, and the book then
nipped in the press and left to dry under a light weight. If the
vellum is very stiff and difficult to turn in, it may be moistened
with a little warm water to soften it.

Books with raised bands have sometimes been covered with vellum, but
the back becomes so stiff and hard, that this method, though it looks
well enough, cannot be recommended. Vellum is a durable material, and
can be had of good quality, but it is so easily influenced by changes
of temperature, that it is rather an unsuitable material for most
bindings.


           BOOKS COVERED WITH EMBROIDERY AND WOVEN MATERIAL

To cover a book with embroidered material bind it with split boards, a
French joint, and a hollow back, as described for vellum (see fig.
78). Glue the back of the book with thin glue well worked up, and
turning in the head and tail of the embroidery, put the book down on
it so that the back will come exactly in the right place. Press down
the embroidery with the hand to make sure that it sticks. When it is
firmly attached to the back, first one board and then the other should
be glued, and the embroidery laid down on it. Lastly, the edges are
glued and stuck down on the inside of the board, and the corners
mitred. Velvet or any other thick material can be put down in the same
way. For very thin material that the glue would penetrate and soil,
the cover should be left loose, and only attached where it turns in. A
loose lining of good paper may be put between the book and the cover.

The inside corners where the cover has been cut should be neatly sewn
up. The edges of the boards and head-caps may be protected all round
with some edging worked in metal thread. It is well in embroidering
book covers to arrange for some portion of the pattern to be of raised
metal stitches, forming bosses that will protect the surface from
wear.

Should any glue chance to get on the surface, the cover should be held
in the steam of a kettle and the glue wiped off, and the cover again
steamed.




                              CHAPTER XIV

               Decoration--Tools--Finishing--Tooling on
                      Vellum--Inlaying on Leather


                     DECORATION OF BINDING--TOOLS

The most usual, and perhaps the most characteristic, way of decorating
book covers is by "tooling." Tooling is the impression of heated
(finishing) tools. Finishing tools are stamps of metal that have a
device cut on the face, and are held in wooden handles (fig. 79).

    [Illustration: FIG. 79.]

Tooling may either be blind tooling, that is, a simple impression of
the hot tools, or gold tooling, in which the impression of the tool is
left in gold on the leather.

Tools for blind tooling are best "die-sunk," that is, cut like a seal.
The "sunk" part of the face of the tool, which may be more or less
modelled, forms the pattern, and the higher part depresses the
leather to form a ground. In tools for gold tooling, the surface of
the tool gives the pattern.

Tools may be either complex or simple in design, that is to say, each
tool may form a complete design with enclosing border, as the lower
ones on page 323, or it may be only one element of a design, as at
fig. 100. Lines may be run with a fillet (see fig. 88), or made with
gouges or pallets.

Gouges are curved line tools. They are made in sets of arcs of
concentric circles (see fig. 80, A). The portion of the curves cut off
by the dotted line C will make a second set with flatter curves.
Gouges are used for tooling curved lines.

    [Illustration: FIG. 80.]

A "pallet" may be described as a segment of a roll or fillet set in a
handle, and used chiefly for putting lines or other ornaments across
the backs of books (see fig. 81). A set of one-line pallets is shown
at fig. 80, B.

Fillets are cut with two or more lines on the edge. Although the use
of double-line fillets saves time, I have found that a few single-line
fillets with edges of different gauges are sufficient for running all
straight lines, and that the advantage of being able to alter the
distances between any parallel lines is ample compensation for the
extra trouble involved by their use. In addition to the rigid stamps,
an endless pattern for either blind or gold tooling may be engraved on
the circumference of a roll, and impressed on the leather by wheeling.

    [Illustration: FIG. 81.]

The use of a roll in finishing dates from the end of the fifteenth
century, and some satisfactory bindings were decorated with its aid.
The ease with which it can be used has led in modern times to its
abuse, and I hardly know of a single instance of a modern binding on
which rolls have been used for the decoration with satisfactory
results. The gain in time and trouble is at the expense of freedom and
life in the design; and for extra binding it is better to build up a
pattern out of small tools of simple design, which can be arranged in
endless variety, than to use rolls.

Tools for hand-tooling must not be too large, or it will be impossible
to obtain clear impressions. One inch square for blind tools, or
three-quarters of an inch for gold tools, is about the maximum size
for use with any certainty and comfort. Tools much larger than this
have to be worked with the aid of a press, and are called blocks.


                               FINISHING

The first thing the finisher does to a book is to go over the back
with a polisher and smooth out any irregularities.

Two forms of polisher are shown at fig. 82. The lower one is suitable
for polishing backs and inside margins, and the upper for sides.
Polishers must be used warm, but not too hot, or the leather may be
scorched, and they must be kept moving on the leather. Before using
they should be rubbed bright on a piece of the finest emery paper, and
polished on a piece of leather. New polishers often have sharp edges
that would mark the leather. These must be rubbed down with files and
emery-paper.

Leathers with a prominent grained surface, such as morocco, seal or
pig skin, may either have the grain rough or crushed flat. If there is
to be much finishing, the grain had better be crushed, but for large
books that are to have only a small amount of finishing, the grain is
best left unflattened.

    [Illustration: FIG. 82.]

If the grain of the leather is to be "crushed," it may be done at this
stage. To do this, one board at a time is damped with a sponge and put
in the standing-press, with a pressing plate on the grained side, and
a pad of blotting-paper, or some such yielding substance, on the other
(see fig. 83). The press is then screwed up tight, and the board left
for a short time. For some leathers this operation is best done after
the binding has been finished and varnished, in which case, of course,
the boards cannot be damped before pressing. No flexibly sewn book
should be subject to great pressure after it has been covered, or the
leather on the back may crinkle up and become detached.

The next thing will be to decide what lettering and what decoration,
if any, is to be put on the volume. The lettering should be made out
first (see page 215). If the book is to be at all elaborately
decorated, paper patterns must be made out, as described in Chapter
XVI.

    [Illustration: FIG. 83.]

For tooling the back, the book is held in the finishing press between
a pair of backing boards lined with leather (see fig. 84), and the
paper pattern put across the back, with the ends either slightly
pasted to the backing boards, or caught between them and the book.

For the sides, the pattern is very slightly pasted on to the leather
at the four corners. The book is then put in the finishing press,
with the board to be tooled open and flat on the cheek of the press,
unless the book is a large one, when it is easier to tool the sides
out of the press.

    [Illustration: FIG. 84.]

The selected tools, which should be ready on the stove (see fig. 85),
are one at a time cooled on a wet pad, and then pressed in their
former impressions upon the paper. The degree of heat required varies
a good deal with the leather used, and will only be learned by
experience. It is better to have the tool too cool than too hot, as it
is easy to deepen impressions after the paper is removed; but if they
are already too deep, or are burnt, it will be impossible to finish
clearly. Generally speaking, tools should hiss very slightly when put
on the cooling pad. In cooling, care must be taken to put the shank
of the tools on to the wet pad, as, if the end only is cooled, the
heat is apt to run down again, and the tool will still be too hot.

    [Illustration: FIG. 85.--Finishing Stove]

Before removing the paper, one corner at a time should be lifted up,
and the leather examined to see that no part of the pattern has been
missed.

In some patterns where the design is close, or in which the background
is dotted in, it will not be necessary to blind in every leaf and dot
through the paper. If the lines with perhaps the terminal leaves are
blinded in, the rest can be better worked directly through the gold.
This method implies the "glairing in" of the whole surface. It is not
suitable for open patterns, where the glaire might show on the surface
of the leather.

If the book is only to have lines, or some simple straight line
pattern, it is often easier to mark it up without the paper, with a
straight-edge and folder. In panelling a back, the side lines of all
the panels should be marked in at the same time with a folder, working
against the straight-edge, held firmly at the side of the back. If the
panels are worked separately, it is difficult to get the side lines
squarely above each other. The lines at the top and bottom of the
panel may be marked in with a folder, guided by a piece of stiff
vellum held squarely across the back. If there are lines to be run
round the board, they can be marked in with a pair of dividers guided
by the edge of the board, except those at the back. These must be
measured from the fore-edge of the board and run in with straight-edge
and folder.

When straight lines occur in patterns that are blinded through the
paper, it will be enough if the ends only are marked through with a
small piece of straight line, and the lines completed with
straight-edge and folder, after the paper has been removed.

Unless the finisher has had considerable experience, it is best to
deepen all folder lines by going over them in blind with a fillet or
piece of straight line.

When the pattern has been worked in blind, either through a paper
pattern or directly on to the leather with the tools, and any inlays
stuck on (see page 213), the cover should be well washed with clean
water. Some finishers prefer to use common vinegar or diluted acetic
acid for washing up books. If vinegar is used it must be of the best
quality, and must not contain any sulphuric acid. Cheap, crude vinegar
is certain to be injurious to the leather. Porous leather, such as
calf or sheep skin, will need to be washed over with paste-water, and
then sized.

Paste-water is paste and water well beaten up to form a milky liquid,
and is applied to the leather as evenly as possible with a sponge.
When the paste-water is dry, the leather should be washed with size.
Size can be made by boiling down vellum cuttings, or by dissolving
gelatine or isinglass in warm water.

For the less porous leathers, such as morocco, seal, or pig skin, no
paste-water or size is necessary, unless the skin happens to be a
specially open one, or the cover has been cut from the flank or belly.
Then it is best to put a little paste in the vinegar or water used for
washing up. When the leather is nearly, but not quite, dry the
impressions of the tools must be painted with glaire. Finishers'
glaire may be made from the white of eggs well beaten up, diluted with
about half as much vinegar, and allowed to settle. Some finishers
prefer to use old, evil-smelling glaire, but provided it is a day old,
and has been well beaten up, fresh glaire will work quite well.

The impressions of any heavy or solid tools should be given a second
coat of glaire when the first has ceased to be "tacky," and if the
leather is at all porous, all impressions had better have a second
coat.

As glaire is apt to show and disfigure the leather when dry, it is
best to use it as sparingly as possible, and, excepting where the
pattern is very close, to confine it to the impressions of the tools.
It is not at all an uncommon thing to see the effect of an otherwise
admirably tooled binding spoilt by a dark margin round the tools,
caused by the careless use of glaire. Glaire should not be used unless
it is quite liquid and clean. Directly it begins to get thick it
should be strained or thrown away.

The finisher should not glaire in more than he can tool the same day.
When the glaire has ceased to be "tacky," the gold is laid on.

    [Illustration: FIG. 86.]

At first it will be found difficult to manage gold leaf. The essential
conditions are, that there should be no draught, and that the cushion
and knife should be quite free from grease. The gold cushion and
knife are shown at fig. 86. A little powdered bath-brick rubbed into
the cushion will make it easier to cut the gold cleanly. The blade of
the gold knife should never be touched with the hand, and before using
it, both sides should be rubbed on the cushion. A book of gold is laid
open on the cushion, and a leaf of gold is lifted up on the gold
knife, which is slipped under it, and turned over on to the cushion. A
light breath exactly in the centre of the sheet should make it lie
flat, when it may be cut into pieces of any size with a slightly
sawing motion of the knife. The book with the pattern ready prepared,
and the glaire sufficiently dry (not sticky), is rubbed lightly with a
small piece of cotton-wool greased with a little cocoanut oil. The
back of the hand is greased in the same way, and a pad of clean
cotton-wool is held in the right hand, and having been made as flat as
possible by being pressed on the table, is drawn over the back of the
hand. This should make it just greasy enough to pick up the gold, but
not too greasy to part with it readily when pressed on the book. As
little grease as possible should be used on the book, as an excess is
apt to stain the leather and to make the gold dull. After experiment
it has been found that cocoanut oil stains the leather less than any
other grease in common use by bookbinders, and is more readily washed
out by benzine.

    [Illustration: FIG. 87.]

If the gold cracks, or is not solid when pressed on the book, a second
thickness should be used. This will stay down if the under piece is
lightly breathed upon.

For narrow strips of gold for lines, a little pad covered with soft
leather may be made, as in fig. 87.

It will be found of advantage to first use the bottom leaf of gold in
the book and then to begin at the top and work through, or else the
bottom leaf will almost certainly be found to be damaged by the time
it is reached. The gold used should be as nearly pure as it can be
got. The gold-beaters say that they are unable to beat pure gold as
thin as is usual for gold leaf; but the quite pure gold is a better
colour than when alloyed, and the additional thickness, although
costly, results in a more solid impression of the tools.

The cost of a book of twenty-four leaves three and a half inches
square of English gold leaf of good ordinary quality is from 1s. 3d.
to 1s. 6d., whereas the cost of a book of double thick pure gold leaf
is 3s. to 3s. 6d. For tooled work it is worth paying the increased
price for the sake of the advantages in colour and solidity; but for
lines and edges, which use up an immense amount of gold, the thinner
and cheaper gold may quite well be used.

Besides pure gold leaf, gold alloyed with various metals to change its
colour can be had. None of the alloys keep their colour as well as
pure gold, and some of them, such as those alloyed with copper for red
gold, and with silver for pale gold, tarnish very quickly. These last
are not to be recommended.

For silver tooling aluminium leaf may be used, as silver leaf
tarnishes very quickly.

When the gold is pressed into the impressions of the tools with the
pad of cotton-wool, they should be plainly visible through it.

The pattern must now be worked through the gold with the hot tools.
The tools are taken from the stove, and if too hot cooled on a pad as
for blinding-in. The heat required to leave the gold tooling solid and
bright and the impressions clear will vary for different leathers, and
even for different skins of the same leather. For trial a tool may be
laid on the pad until it ceases to hiss, and one or two impressions
worked with it. If the gold fails to stick, the heat may be slightly
increased.

If the leather is slightly damp from the preparation the tools will
usually work better, and less heat is required than if it has been
prepared for some time and has got dry.

Before using, the faces of all tools must be rubbed bright on the
flesh side of a piece of leather. It is impossible to tool brightly
with dirty tools. A tool should be held in the right hand, with the
thumb on the top of the handle, and steadied with the thumb or first
finger of the left hand. The shoulder should be brought well over the
tool, and the upper part of the body used as a press. If the weight of
the body is used in finishing, the tools can be worked with far
greater firmness and certainty, and with less fatigue, than if the
whole work is done with the muscles of the arms.

Large and solid tools will require all the weight that can be put on
them, and even then the gold will often fail to stick with one
impression. Tools with small surfaces, such as gouges and dots, must
not be worked too heavily, or the surface of the leather may be cut.

To strike a large or solid tool, it should first be put down flat, and
then slightly rocked from side to side and from top to bottom, but
must not be twisted on the gold.

A tool may be struck from whichever side the best "sight" can be got,
and press and book turned round to the most convenient position.

It is difficult to impress some tools, such as circular flower tools,
twice in exactly the same place. Such tools should have a mark on one
side as a guide. This should always be kept in the same position when
blinding-in and tooling, and so make it possible to impress a second
time without "doubling." An impression is said to be "doubled" when
the tool has been twisted in striking, or one impression does not fall
exactly over the other.

The hot tool should not be held hovering over the impression long, or
the preparation will be dried up before the tool is struck. Tooling
will generally be brighter if the tools are struck fairly sharply, and
at once removed from the leather, than if they are kept down a long
time.

To "strike" dots, the book should be turned with the head to the
worker, and the tool held with the handle inclining slightly towards
him. This will make them appear bright when the book is held the right
way up.

Gouges must be "sighted" from the inside of the curve, and struck
evenly, or the points may cut into the leather. Short straight lines
may be put in with pieces of line, and longer ones with a fillet.

A one line fillet is shown at fig. 88; the space filed out of the
circumference is to enable lines to be joined neatly at the corners.
That the lines may be clearly visible through the gold, the book
should be placed so that the light comes from the left hand of the
worker and across the line. It is well to have a basin of water in
which to cool fillets, as there is so much metal in them, that the
damp sponge or cotton used for cooling tools would very rapidly be
dried up. When the fillet has been cooled, the edge should be rubbed
on the cleaning pad, and the point exactly adjusted to the corner of
the line to be run (see fig. 88). The fillet is then run along the
line with even pressure.

    [Illustration: FIG. 88.]

For slightly curved lines, a very small fillet may be used.

When all the prepared part of a pattern has been tooled, it is well
rubbed to remove the loose gold with a slightly greasy rag, or with a
piece of bottle indiarubber which has been softened in paraffin. After
a time the rubber or rag may be sold to the gold-beater, who recovers
the gold. To prepare indiarubber for cleaning off gold, a piece of
bottle rubber is cut into small pieces and soaked in paraffin for some
hours. This should cause the pieces to reunite into a soft lump. This
can be used until it is yellow with gold throughout.

When all free gold is rubbed off, the finisher can see where the
tooling is imperfect. Impressions which are not "solid" must be
reglaired, have fresh gold laid on, and be retooled. But if, as will
sometimes happen with the best finishers, the gold has failed to stick
properly anywhere, it is best to wash the whole with water or vinegar,
and prepare afresh.

As an excess of grease is apt to dull the gold and soil the leather,
it is better to use it very sparingly when laying on fresh gold for
mending. For patching, benzine may be used instead of grease. When the
gold is picked up on the cotton-wool pad, rapidly go over the leather
with wool soaked in benzine, and at once lay down the gold. Benzine
will not hold the gold long enough for much tooling, but it will
answer for about half-an-hour, and give plenty of time for patching.

Imperfect tooling arises from a variety of causes. If an impression is
clear, but the gold not solid, it is probably because the tool was not
hot enough, or was not put down firmly. If only one side of an
impression fails to stick, it is usually because the tool was unevenly
impressed. If an impression is blurred, and the gold has a frosted
look, it is because the leather has been burned, either because the
tool was too hot, or kept down too long, or the preparation was too
fresh.

To mend double or burnt impressions the leather should be wetted and
left to soak a short time, and the gold can be picked out with a
wooden point. When nearly dry the impressions should be put in again
with a cool tool, reglaired and retooled.

It is very difficult to mend neatly if the leather is badly burnt.
Sometimes it may be advisable to paste a piece of new leather over a
burnt impression before retooling.

If a tool is put down in the wrong place by mistake, it is difficult
to get the impression out entirely. The best thing to do is to damp
the leather thoroughly, leave it to soak for a little while, and pick
up the impression with the point of a pin. It is best not to use an
iron point for this, as iron is apt to blacken the leather.

Leather is difficult to tool if it has not a firm surface, or if it is
too thin to give a little when the tool is struck.

When the tooling is finished, and the loose gold removed with the
rubber, the leather should be washed with benzine, to remove any
grease and any fragments of gold that may be adhering by the grease
only.

The inside margins of the boards are next polished and varnished, and
the end papers pasted down. Or if there is a leather joint, the panel
left on the board may be filled in (see Chapter XVII).

When the end papers are dry, the sides and back may be polished and
varnished.

It is important that the varnish should be of good quality, and not
too thick, or it will in time turn brown and cause the gold to look
dirty. Some of the light French spirit varnishes prepared for
bookbinders answer well. Varnish must be used sparingly, and is best
applied with a pad of cotton-wool. A little varnish is poured on to
the pad, which is rubbed on a piece of paper until it is seen that the
varnish comes out thinly and evenly. It is then rubbed on the book
with a spiral motion. The quicker the surface is gone over, provided
every part is covered, the better. Varnish will not work well if it is
very cold, and in cold weather both the book and varnish bottle should
be slightly warmed before use. Should an excess of varnish be put on
in error, or should it be necessary to retool part of the book after
it has been varnished, the varnish can be removed with spirits of
wine. Varnish acts as a preservative to the leather, but has the
disadvantage, if used in excess, of making it rather brittle on the
surface. It must, therefore, be used very sparingly at the joints. It
is to be hoped that a perfectly elastic varnish, that will not tarnish
the gold, will soon be discovered.

As soon as the varnish is dry the boards may be pressed, one at a
time, to give the leather a smooth surface (see fig. 83), leaving each
board in the press for some hours.

    [Illustration: FIG. 89.]

After each board has been pressed separately the book should be shut,
and pressed again with pressing plates on each side of it, and with
tins covered with paper placed inside each board. Light pressure
should be given to books with tight backs, or the leather may become
detached.

If, on removing from the press, the boards will not keep shut, the
book should be pressed again with a folded sheet of blotting-paper in
each end. The blotting-paper should have the folded edge turned up,
and be placed so that this turned-up edge will be in the joint behind
the back edge of the board when the book is shut.

A small nipping-press suitable for giving comparatively light
pressure, is shown at fig. 89.


                           TOOLING ON VELLUM

Most covering vellum has a sticky surface, that marks if it is
handled. This should be washed off with clean water before tooling.
The pattern is blinded in through the paper as for leather, excepting
that the paper must not be pasted directly to the vellum, but may be
held with a band going right round the board or book. It is best to
glaire twice, and to lay on a small portion of gold at a time with
benzine. As vellum burns very readily, the tools must not be too hot,
and some skill is needed to prevent them from slipping on the hard
surface.

Vellum must not be polished or varnished.


                          INLAYING ON LEATHER

Inlaying or onlaying is adding a different leather from that of the
cover, as decoration. Thus on a red book, a panel or a border, or
other portion, may be covered with thin green leather, or only flowers
or leaves may be inlaid, while a jewel-like effect may be obtained by
dots, leaves, and flowers, tooled over inlays of various colours.
Leather for inlaying should be pared very thin. To do this the leather
is cut into strips, wetted, and pared on a stone with a knife shaped
somewhat as at fig. 60, B. When the thin leather is dry the inlays of
the leaves and flowers, &c., may be stamped out with steel punches cut
to the shape of the tools; or if only a few inlays are needed, the
tools may be impressed on the thin leather, and the inlays cut out
with a sharp knife. The edges of the larger inlays should be pared
round carefully. For inlaying a panel or other large surface, the
leather is pared very thin and evenly with a French knife, and a piece
of paper pasted on to the grained side and left to dry. When dry, the
shape of the panel, or other space to be inlaid, is marked on it
through the paper pattern, and leather and paper cut through to the
shape required. The edges must then be carefully pared, and the piece
attached with paste, and nipped in the press to make it stick. When
the paste is dry, the paper may be damped and washed off. The object
of the paper is to prevent the thin leather from stretching when it is
pasted.

For white inlays it is better to use Japanese paper than leather, as
white leather, when pared very thin, will show the colours of the
under leather through, and look dirty. If paper is used, it should be
sized with vellum size before tooling.

When many dots or leaves are to be inlaid, the pieces of leather, cut
out with the punch, may be laid face downwards on a paring stone, and
a piece of paper, thickly covered with paste, laid on it. This, on
being taken up, will carry with it the "inlays," and they can be
picked up one at a time on the point of a fine folder, and stuck on
the book.

"Inlays" of tools are attached after the pattern has been "blinded"
in, and must be again worked over with the tool, in blind, when the
paste is nearly dry.

On vellum an effect, similar to that of inlays on leather, can be
obtained by the use of stains.




                              CHAPTER XV

              Lettering--Blind Tooling--Heraldic Ornament


                         LETTERING ON THE BACK

Lettering may be done either with separate letters, each on its own
handle, or with type set in a type-holder and worked across the back
as a pallet. Although by the use of type great regularity is ensured,
and some time saved, the use of handle letters gives so much more
freedom of arrangement, that their use is advocated for extra binding.
Where a great many copies of the same work have to be lettered, the
use of type has obvious advantages.

A great deal depends on the design of the letters used. Nearly all
bookbinders' letters are made too narrow, and with too great
difference between the thick and thin strokes. At fig. 90 is shown an
alphabet, for which I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Emery Walker.
The long tail of the Q is meant to go under the U. It might be well to
have a second R cut, with a shorter tail, to avoid the great space
left when an A happens to follow it. I have found that four sizes of
letters are sufficient for all books.

    [Illustration: FIG. 90.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 91.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 92.]

To make out a lettering paper for the back of a book, cut a strip of
good thin paper as wide as the height of the panel to be lettered.
Fold it near the centre, and mark the fold with a pencil. This should
give a line exactly at right angles to the top and bottom of the
strip. Then make another fold the distance from the first of the width
of the back; then bring the two folds together, and make a third fold
in the exact centre. The paper should then be as shown at fig. 91.
Supposing the lettering to be THE WORKS OF ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON,
select the size of letter you desire to use, and take an E and mark on
a piece of spare paper a line of E's, and laying your folded paper
against it, see how many letters will go in comfortably. Supposing you
find that four lines of five letters of the selected size can be put
in, you must see if your title can be conveniently cut up into four
lines of five letters, or less. It might be done as shown at fig. 93.
But if you prefer not to split the name STEVENSON, a smaller letter
must be employed, and then the lettering may be as at fig. 94.

To find out the position of the lines of lettering on a panel, the
letter E is again taken and impressed five times at the side of the
panel, as shown at fig. 92, leaving a little greater distance between
the lowest letter and the bottom of the panel, than between the
letters. The paper is then folded on the centre fold, and, with
dividers set to the average distance between the head of one letter
and the head of the next, five points are made through the folded
paper. The paper is opened, turned over, and the points joined with a
fine folder worked against the straight-edge. It should leave on the
front five raised lines, up to which the head of the letters must be
put.

    [Illustration: FIG. 93.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 94.]

The letters in the top line are counted, and the centre letter marked.
Spaces between words are counted as a letter; thus in "THE WORKS," "W"
will be the centre letter, and should be put on the paper first, and
the others added on each side of it. Some thought is needed in judging
where to put the centre, as the difference in the width of such
letters as "M" and "W" and "I" and "J" have to be taken into account.

As a general rule, lettering looks best if it comfortably fills the
panel, but of course it cannot always be made to do this. The greatest
difficulty will be found in making titles of books that consist of a
single word, look well. Thus if you have "CORIOLANUS" to place on a
back which is not more than 5/8-inch wide, if it is put across as one
word, as at fig. 95 (1), it will be illegible from the smallness of
the type, and will tell merely as a gold line at a little distance. If
a reasonably large type is used, the word must be broken up somewhat,
as at (2), which is perhaps better, but still not at all satisfactory.
The word may be put straight along the back, as at fig. (3), but this
hardly looks well on a book with raised bands, and should be avoided
unless necessary.

    [Illustration: FIG. 95.]

The use of type of different sizes in lettering a book should be
avoided when possible, and on no account whatever should letters of
different design be introduced. Occasionally, when the reason for it
is obvious, it may be allowable to make a word shorter by putting in a
small letter, supposing that only thus could reasonably large type be
used. It is especially allowable in cases where, in a set of volumes,
there is one much thinner than the others. It is generally better to
make some compromise with the lettering of the thin volume, than to
spoil the lettering of the whole set by using too small a letter
throughout (see fig. 115).

On very thin books it is sometimes hardly possible to get any
lettering at all on the back. In such cases the lettering is best put
on the side.

In the case of some special books that are to have elaborately
decorated bindings, and are on that account sufficiently distinct from
their neighbours, a certain amount of freedom is permissible with the
lettering, and a little mystery is not perhaps out of place. But in
most cases books have to be recognised by their titles, and it is of
the utmost importance that the lettering should be as clear as
possible, and should fully identify the volume.

For lettering half-bindings and other books on which much time cannot
be spared, it would take too long to make out a paper, as described
for extra bindings, nor is there on such work much occasion for it.
For such books the lettering should be written out carefully, the
whole panel prepared and glaired in, and the gold laid on. Then with a
piece of fine silk or thread lines may be marked across the gold as a
guide to the finisher, and the letters worked from the centre
outward, as described for making out the paper pattern. Of course this
method does not allow of such nice calculation and adjustment as when
a paper pattern is made out; but if a general principle of clear
lettering is recognised and accepted, very good results may be
obtained.


                             BLIND TOOLING

    [Illustration: FIG. 96.]

At the end of the book characteristic examples of blind-tooled books
are given (pages 321-25). It will be seen that most of the tools form
complete designs in themselves. Although the use of detached die-sunk
tools was general, there were also simple tools used, which, when
combined, made up more or less organic designs, and allowed more
freedom to the finisher (see figs. 96 and 97).

    [Illustration: FIG. 97.]

Some use may also be made of interlaced strap-work designs, either
worked with gouges, or a small fillet. A book bound in oaken boards,
with a leather back with knotted decoration, is shown at page 330. I
have found that such binding and decoration is more satisfactory in
scheme for old books, than most forms of modern binding.

If a design is simple, the cover is marked up with dividers, and the
tools impressed direct upon the leather; or, if it is elaborate, a
paper pattern is made out, and the tools blinded through the paper, as
described for gold tooling. The leather is then damped with water, and
the impressions retooled.

    [Illustration: FIG. 98.]

The panel lines on most of the bindings before 1500 show evidence of
having been put in with a tool which has been pushed along the
leather, and not with a wheel. I have found that a tool guided by a
straight-edge, and "jiggered" backwards and forwards, makes by far the
best lines for blind-tool work. It should be borne in mind that the
line is formed by the raised portion of leather, and so the tool
should be cut somewhat as at fig. 98. This should leave three ridges
on the leather. Blind tooling may be gone over and over until it is
deep enough, and may be combined with various other methods of
working. For instance, in tooling such a spray as is shown at fig. 99,
the leaf would be formed by five impressions of the second tool, shown
at A, the extremity of the impressions could be joined with gouges,
the stalk and veining could either be run in with a fillet or worked
with gouges. The grapes would best be worked with a tool cut for the
purpose. One edge of all gouge or fillet impressions can be smoothed
down with some such tool as shown in section at B. This has to be
worked round the gouge lines with a steady hand, and may be fairly hot
if it is kept moving. At C is shown a section of a gouge impression
before and after the use of this tool. The ground can be dotted in, or
otherwise gone over with some small tool to throw up the pattern.

Blind tooling can sometimes be used in combination with gold tooling.

    [Illustration: FIG. 99.]

In the fifteenth century the Venetian binders used little roundels of
some gesso-like substance, that were brightly coloured or gilt, in
combination with blind tooling (see p. 325). This is a method that
might be revived.

What is known as "leather work" is a further development of blind
tooling. This method of decoration has been revived lately, but not
generally with success. "Leather work" may be divided into two
branches; in one the surface of the leather is cut to outline the
pattern, and in the other the leather is embossed from the back, while
wet, and the pattern outlined by an indented line. Sometimes the two
methods are combined. As embossing from the back necessitates the work
being done before the leather is on the book, it is not very suitable
for decorating books. Leather first decorated and then stuck on the
book, never looks as if it was an integral part of the binding. The
cut leather work, which may be done after the book is bound, and
leaves the surface comparatively flat, is a better method to employ
for books, provided the cuts are not too deep, and are restricted to
the boards, so as not to weaken the leather at the back and joints.
Much of the leather used for "leather work" is of very poor quality,
and will not last; for modelling it must be thick on the side of the
book, and for the book to open it must be pared thin at the joint,
thus making it necessary to use a thick skin very much pared down, and
consequently weakened (see p. 155). Another very common fault in
modelled "leather work" is, that the two sides and the back are often
worked separately and stuck together on the book, necessitating a
join, and consequently a weak place in the hinge, where strength is
most wanted. Again, in most modern "leather work," those who do the
decoration do not, as a rule, do the binding, and often do not
understand enough of the craft to do suitable work.

All those engaged in leather work are advised to learn to bind their
own books, and to only use such methods of decoration, as can be
carried out on the bound book.


                        HERALDRY ON BOOK COVERS

It is an old and good custom to put the arms of the owner of a library
on the covers of the books he has bound. The traditional, and
certainly one of the best ways to do this, is to have an arms block
designed and cut. To design an arms block, knowledge of heraldry is
needed, and also some clear idea of the effect to be aimed at. A very
common mistake in designing blocks is to try and get the effect of
hand tooling. Blocks should be and look something entirely different.
In hand tooling much of the effect is got from the impressions of
small tools reflecting the light at slightly different angles, giving
the work life and interest. Blocked gold being all in one plane, has
no such lights in it, and depends entirely on its design for its
effect.

Provided the heraldry identifies the owner, it should be as simply
drawn as it can be; the custom of indicating the tinctures by lines
and dots on the charges, generally makes a design confused, obscuring
the coat it is intended to make clear. In designing heraldic blocks it
is well to get a good deal of solid flat surface of gold to make the
blocked design stand out from any gold-tooled work on the cover.

Another way of putting armorial bearings on covers, is to paint them
in oil paint. In the early sixteenth century the Venetians copied the
Eastern custom of sinking panels in their book covers, and painted
coats of arms on these sunk portions very successfully. The groundwork
of the shield itself was usually raised a little, either by something
under the leather, or by some gesso-like substance on its surface.

Arms blocks should be placed a little above the centre of the cover.
Generally, if the centre of the block is in a line with the centre
band of a book with five bands, it will look right.

Blocks are struck with the aid of an arming or blocking press. The
block is attached to the movable plate of the press called the
"platen." To do this some stout brown paper is first glued to the
platen, and the block glued to this, and the platen fixed in its place
at the bottom of the heating-box. In blocking arms on a number of
books of different sizes, some nice adjustment of the movable bed is
needed to get the blocks to fall in exactly the right place.

For blocking, one coat of glaire will be enough for most leathers. The
gold is laid on as for hand tooling. The block should be brought down
and up again fairly sharply. The heat needed is about the same as for
hand tooling.




                              CHAPTER XVI

                 Designing for Gold-Tooled Decoration


                            DESIGNING TOOLS

For gold tooling, such tools as gouges, dots, pieces of straight line,
and fillets are to be had ready-made at most dealers. Other tools are
best designed and cut to order. At first only a few simple forms will
be needed, such as one or two flowers of different sizes, and one or
two sets of leaves (see fig. 100).

    [Illustration: FIG. 100 (reduced)]

In designing tools, it must be borne in mind that they may appear on
the book many times repeated, and so must be simple in outline and
much conventionalised. A more or less naturalistic drawing of a
flower, showing the natural irregularities, may look charming, but if
a tool is cut from it, any marked irregularity becomes extremely
annoying when repeated several times on a cover. So with leaves,
unless they are perfectly symmetrical, there should be three of each
shape cut, two curving in different directions, and the third quite
straight (see fig. 101). To have only one leaf, and to have that
curved, produces very restless patterns. The essence of gold-tool
design, is that patterns are made up of repeats of impressions of
tools, and that being so, the tools must be so designed that they will
repeat pleasantly, and in practice it will be found that any but
simple forms will become aggressive in repetition.

    [Illustration: FIG. 101.]

Designs for tools should be made out with Indian ink on white paper,
and they may be larger than the size of the required tool. The
tool-cutter will reduce any drawing to any desired size, and will,
from one drawing, cut any number of tools of different sizes. Thus, if
a set of five leaves of the same shape is wanted, it will only be
necessary to draw one, and to indicate the sizes the others are to be
in some such way as shown at fig. 102.

It is not suggested that special tools should be cut for each pattern,
but the need of new tools will naturally arise from time to time, and
so the stock be gradually increased. It is better to begin with a very
few, and add a tool or two as occasion arises, than to try to design a
complete set when starting.

    [Illustration: FIG. 102.]

Tools may be solid or in outline. If in outline they may be used as
"inlay" tools, and in ordering them the tool-cutter should be asked to
provide steel punches for cutting the inlays.


                   COMBINING TOOLS TO FORM PATTERNS

It is well for the student to begin with patterns arranged on some
very simple plan, making slight changes in each succeeding pattern.
In this way an individual style may be established. The usual plan of
studying the perfected styles of the old binders, and trying to begin
where they left off, in practice only leads to the production of exact
imitations, or poor lifeless parodies, of the old designs. Whereas a
pattern developed by the student by slow degrees, through a series of
designs, each slightly different from the one before it, will, if
eccentricities are avoided, probably have life and individual
interest.

Perhaps the easiest way to decorate a binding is to cover it with some
small repeating pattern. A simple form of diaper as a beginning is
shown at fig. 104. To make such a pattern cut a piece of good, thin
paper to the size of the board of a book, and with a pencil rule a
line about an eighth of an inch inside the margin all round. Then with
the point of a fine folder that will indent, but not cut the paper,
mark up as shown in fig. 103. The position of the lines A A and B B
are found by simply folding the paper, first side to side, and then
head to tail. The other lines can be put in without any measurement
by simply joining all points where lines cross. By continual
re-crossing, the spaces into which the paper is divided can be reduced
to any desired size. If the construction lines are accurately put in,
the spaces will all be of the same size and shape. It is then evident
that a repeating design to fill any one of the spaces can be made to
cover the whole surface.

    [Illustration: FIG. 103.]

In fig. 104, it is the diagonal lines only that are utilised for the
pattern. To avoid confusion, the cross lines that helped to determine
the position of the diagonals are not shown.

    [Illustration: FIG. 104 (reduced)]

The advantage of using the point of a folder to mark up the
constructional lines of a pattern instead of a pencil, is that the
lines so made are much finer, do not rub out, and do not cause
confusion by interfering with the pattern. Any lines that will appear
on the book, such as the marginal lines, may be put in with a pencil
to distinguish them.

Having marked up the paper, select a flower tool and impress it at the
points where the diagonal lines cross, holding it in the smoke of a
candle between every two or three impressions. When the flower has
been impressed all over, select a small piece of straight line, and
put a stalk in below each flower; then a leaf put in on each side of
the straight line will complete the pattern.

    [Illustration: FIG. 105 (reduced)]

A development of the same principle is shown at fig. 105, in which
some gouges are introduced. Any number of other combinations will
occur to any one using the tools. Frequently questions will arise as
to whether a tool is to be put this way or that way, and whether a
line is to curve up or down. Whenever there is such an alternative
open, there is the germ of another pattern. All-over diaper patterns
may be varied in any number of ways. One way is to vary the design in
alternate spaces. If this is done one of the designs should be such
that it will divide down the centre both ways and so finish off the
pattern comfortably at the edges. The pattern may be based on the
upright and the cross-lines of the marking up, or the marking up may
be on a different principle altogether. The designer, after a little
practice, will be bewildered by the infinite number of combinations
that occur to him.

    [Illustration: FIG. 106 (reduced)]

The diaper is selected for a beginning, because it is the easiest form
of pattern to make, as there is no question of getting round corners,
and very little of studying proportion. It is selected also because it
teaches the student the decorative value of simple forms repeated on
some orderly system. When he has grasped this, he has grasped the
underlying principle of nearly all successful tooled ornament. Diapers
are good practice, because in a close, all-over pattern the tools must
be put down in definite places, or an appalling muddle will result. In
tooling; a repeat of the same few tools, is the best possible
practice, giving as it does the same work over and over again under
precisely the same conditions, and concentrating, on one book cover,
the practice that might be spread over several backs and sides more
sparingly decorated, when variety of conditions would confuse the
student.

    [Illustration: FIG. 107.]

When the principles of the diaper have been mastered, and the student
has become familiar with the limitations of his tools, other schemes
of decoration may be attempted, such as borders, centres, or panels.

A form of border connected with cross-lines is shown at fig. 106. This
is made up of a repeat of the spray built up of three tools and four
gouges shown at fig. 107, with slight modification at the corners.
Other schemes for borders are those in which flowers grow inwards from
the edge of the boards, or outwards from a panel at the centre, or on
both sides of a line about half an inch from the edge. A pattern may
also be made to grow all round the centre panel. Borders will be found
more difficult to manage than simple diapers, and at first, are best
built up on the same principle--the repeat of some simple element.

    [Illustration: FIG. 108 (reduced)]

The decoration may be concentrated on parts of the cover, such as the
centre or corners. A design for a centre is shown at fig. 108, and
below is shown the way to construct it. A piece of paper is folded, as
shown by the dotted lines, and an eighth of the pattern drawn with a
soft pencil and folded over on the line A, and transferred by being
rubbed at the back with a folder. This is lined in with a pencil, and
folded over on the line B and rubbed off. This is lined in and folded
over on A and C, rubbed off as before, and the whole lined in. The
overs and unders of the lines are then marked, and gouges selected to
fit. Of course it will take several trials before the lines will
interlace pleasantly, and the tools fit in. Another centre, in which a
spray is repeated three times, is shown at fig. 109, and any number of
others will occur to the student after a little practice. A change of
tools, or the slight alteration of a line, will give an entirely new
aspect to a pattern. At page 334 is shown an all-over pattern growing
from the bottom centre of the board. In this design the leather was
dark green, with a lighter green panel in the centre. The berries were
inlaid in bright red. Although at first glance it seems an intricate
design, it is made up like the others of repetitions of simple forms.

    [Illustration: FIG. 109 (reduced)]

When the student has become proficient in the arrangement of tools in
combination with lines, a design consisting entirely, or almost
entirely, of lines may be tried. This is more difficult, because the
limitations are not so obvious; but here again the principle of
repetition, and even distribution, should be followed. At fig. 110 is
shown a design almost entirely composed of lines, built up on the same
principle as the centre at fig. 108.

    [Illustration: FIG. 110 (reduced)]

The ends of the bands form a very pleasant starting-place for
patterns. At pp. 330, 332-6 are shown ways of utilising this method.
To look right, a pattern must be consistent throughout. The tools and
their arrangement must have about the same amount of convention. Gold
tooling, dealing, as it does, with flat forms in silhouette only,
necessitates very considerable formality in the design of the tools
and of their arrangement on the cover. Modern finishers have become so
skilful, that they are able to produce in gold tooling almost any
design that can be drawn in lines with a pencil, and some truly
marvellous results are obtained by the use of inlays, and specially
cut gouges. As a rule, such patterns simply serve to show the skill of
the finisher, and to make one wonder who could have been foolish
enough to select so limited and laborious a method as gold tooling for
carrying them out.

Generally speaking, successful gold-tooled patterns show evidence of
having been designed with the tools; of being, in fact, mere
arrangements of the tools, and not of having been first designed with
a pencil, and then worked with tools cut to fit the drawing. This does
not of course apply to patterns composed entirely of lines, or to
patterns composed of lines of dots.

If artists wish to design for gold tooling without first mastering the
details, probably the safest way will be for them to design in lines
of gold dots. Some successful patterns carried out in this way were
shown at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition some years ago.

Designs for gold-tooled binding should always be constructed on some
geometrical plan, and whatever pattern there is, symmetrically
distributed over the cover.

If lettering can be introduced, it will be found to be most useful
when arranging a pattern. It gives dignity and purpose to a design,
and is also highly decorative. Lettering may be arranged in panels, as
at page 332, or in a border round the edge of the board, and in many
other ways. It may either consist of the title of the book, or some
line or verse from it or connected with it, or may refer to its
history, or to the owner. Anything that gives a personal interest to a
book, such as the arms of the owner, the initials or name of the giver
or receiver of a present, with perhaps the date of the gift, is of
value.

The use of the small fillet makes it possible to employ long,
slightly-curved lines. Gold-tooled lines have in themselves such
great beauty, that designers are often tempted to make them meander
about the cover in a weak and aimless way. As the limitations enforced
by the use of gouges tend to keep the curves strong and small, and as
the use of the small fillet tends to the production of long, weak
curves, students are advised at first to restrict the curved lines in
their patterns to such as can be readily worked with gouges.

    [Illustration: FIG. 111.]

It must be remembered that a gouge or fillet line is very thin, and
will look weak if it goes far without support. For this reason
interlaced lines are advocated.

Gouge lines are easier to work, and look better, if a small space is
left where the gouges end. This is especially the case where lines
bearing leaves or flowers branch from the main stem (see fig. 111).

Gouges and fillets need not always be of the same thickness of line,
and two or three sets of different gauges may be kept. A finisher can
always alter the thickness of a gouge with emery paper.

One method of arranging gold-tooled lines is to treat them in design
as if they were wires in tension, and knot and twist them together.
Provided the idea is consistently adhered to throughout, such a
pattern is often very successful.

    [Illustration: FIG. 112.]

A simple arrangement of straight lines will be sufficient
ornamentation for most books. Three schemes for such ornamentation are
shown. In fig. 112 the "tie-downs" may be in "blind" and the lines in
gold. The arrangement shown at fig. 113 leaves a panel at the top
which may be utilised for lettering.

    [Illustration: FIG. 113.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 114.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 115.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 115.]


                          DESIGNING FOR BACKS

The decoration of the back of a book is difficult owing to the very
small space usually available in the panels. The first consideration
must be the lettering, and when that has been arranged, as described
in Chapter XV, a second paper is got out for the pattern. The back
panel should generally be treated in the same style and, if possible,
with the same tools as the sides, if they are decorated. It will often
be found far easier to design a full-gilt side than a satisfactory
back.

A design may be made to fit one panel of the book and repeated on all
those not required for lettering (see pages 332-34), or it may be made
to grow up from panel to panel (see fig. 115). In the case of sets of
books in which the volumes vary very much in thickness, some pattern
must be made that can be contracted and expanded without altering the
general look of the back (see fig. 115).


                    DESIGNING FOR INSIDE OF BOARDS

The inside margins of the board permit of a little delicate
decoration. At fig. 116 are shown two ways of treating this part of
the binding. The inside of the board is sometimes covered all over
with leather, and tooled as elaborately, or more elaborately, than the
outside. If there are vellum ends, they may be enriched with a little
tooling.

    [Illustration: FIG. 116.]

The edges of the boards may have a gold line run on them, and the
head-cap may be decorated with a few dots.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                Pasting down End Papers--Opening Books


                        PASTING DOWN END PAPERS

When the finishing is done, the end papers should be pasted down on to
the board; or if there is a leather joint, the panel left should be
filled in to match the end paper.

To paste down end papers, the book is placed on the block with the
board open (see fig. 117, A), the waste sheets are torn off, the
joints cleared of any glue or paste, and the boards flattened, as
described at page 171 for pasting down leather joints. One of the
paste-down papers is then stretched over the board and rubbed down in
the joint, and the amount to be cut off to make it fit into the space
left by the turn-in of the leather is marked on it with dividers,
measuring from the edge of the board. A cutting tin is then placed on
the book, the paste-down paper turned over it, and the edges trimmed
off to the divider points with a knife and straight-edge, leaving
small pieces to cover the ends of the joint (fig. 117, A, c).

The cutting and pasting down of these small pieces in the joint are
rather difficult; they should come exactly to the edges of the board.

    [Illustration: FIG. 117.]

When both paste-down papers are trimmed to size, one of them is well
pasted with thin paste in which there are no lumps, with a piece of
waste paper under it to protect the book. The joints should also be
pasted, and the paste rubbed in with the finger and any surplus
removed.

The pasted paper is then brought over on to the board, the edges
adjusted exactly to their places, and rubbed down. The joint must next
be rubbed down through paper. It is difficult to get the paper to
stick evenly in the joint, and great nicety is needed here. All
rubbing down must be done through paper, or the "paste-down" will be
soiled or made shiny.

Some papers stretch very much when pasted, and will need to be cut a
little smaller than needed, and put down promptly after pasting. Thin
vellum may be put down with paste in which there is a very little
glue, but thicker vellum is better put down with thin glue. In pasting
vellum, very great care is needed to prevent the brush-marks from
showing through. If the vellum is thin, the board must be lined with
white or toned paper with a smooth surface. This paper must be quite
clean, as any marks will show through the vellum, and make it look
dirty.

When one side is pasted down the book can be turned over without
shutting the board, and the other board opened and pasted down in the
same way (see fig. 117, B). In turning over a book, a piece of white
paper should be put under the newly-pasted side, as, being damp, it
will soil very readily. When both ends have been pasted down the
joints should be examined and rubbed down again, and the book stood up
on end with the boards open until the end papers are dry. The boards
may be held open with a piece of cardboard cut as shown at fig. 71.

If there are cloth joints they are put down with glue, and the board
paper is placed nearly to the edge of the joint, leaving very little
cloth visible.

In the process of finishing, the boards of a book will nearly always
be warped a little outward, but the pasted end papers should draw the
boards a little as they dry, causing them to curve slightly towards
the book. With vellum ends there is a danger that the boards will be
warped too much.


                       OPENING NEWLY BOUND BOOKS

Before sending out a newly bound book the binder should go through it,
opening it here and there to ease the back. The volume is laid on a
table, and the leaves opened a short distance from the front, and then
at an equal distance from the back, and then in one or two places
nearer the centre of the book, the leaves being pressed down with the
hand at each opening. If the book is a valuable one, every leaf should
then be turned over separately and each opening pressed down,
beginning from the centre and working first one way and then the
other. In this way the back will be bent evenly at all points. When a
book has been opened, it should be lightly pressed for a short time
without anything in the joints.

If a book is sent out unopened, the first person into whose hand it
falls will probably open it somewhere in the centre, bending the
covers back and "breaking" the back; and if any leaves chance to have
been stuck together in edge-gilding, they are likely to be torn if
carelessly opened. A book with a "broken" back will always have a
tendency to open in the same place, and will not keep its shape. It
would be worth while for librarians to have newly bound books
carefully opened. An assistant could "open" a large number of books
in a day, and the benefit to the bindings would amply compensate for
the small trouble and cost involved.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                  Clasps and Ties--Metal on Bindings


                            CLASPS AND TIES

Some books need to be clasped to keep the leaves flat. All books
written or printed on vellum should have clasps. Vellum unless kept
flat is apt to cockle, and this in a book will force the leaves apart
and admit dust. If a book is tightly wedged in a shelf the leaves will
be kept flat, but as the chance removal of any other book from the row
will remove the pressure, it is much better to provide clasps for
vellum books.

Very thick books, and those with a great many folded plates, are
better for having clasps to prevent the leaves from sagging. As nearly
all books are now kept in bookshelves, and as any projection on the
side of a book is likely to injure the neighbouring volume, a form of
clasp should be used that has no raised parts on the boards.

    [Illustration: FIG. 118.]

At fig. 118 is shown a simple clasp suitable for small books with
mill-board sides, with details of the metal parts, made of thick
silver wire below. Double boards must be "made," and the flattened
ends of the silver catch inserted between the two thicknesses, and
glued in place. About one-eighth of an inch of the end should project.
In covering, the leather must be pierced and carefully worked round
the catch. To make the plait, three strips of thin leather are slipped
through the ring, and the ends of each strip pasted together. The
three doubled strips are then plaited and the end of the plait put
through a hole in the lower board of the book about half an inch from
the edge, and glued down inside. A groove may be cut in the mill-board
from the hole to the edge before covering, to make a depression in
which the plait will lie, and a depression may be scooped out of the
inner surface of the board to receive the ends.

At fig. 119 is a somewhat similar clasp with three plaits suitable for
large books. The metal end and the method of inserting it into wooden
boards are shown below. The turned-down end should go right through
the board, and be riveted on the inside. When the three plaits are
worked, a little band of silver may be riveted on just below the ring.

    [Illustration: FIG. 119.]

A very simple fastening that is sometimes useful is shown at fig. 77.
A very small bead is threaded on to a piece of catgut, and the two
ends of the gut brought together and put through a larger bead. The
ends of the gut with the beads on them are laced into the top board
of the book, with the bead projecting over the edge, and a loop of gut
is laced into the bottom board. If the loop can be made exactly the
right length, this is a serviceable method.

Silk or leather ties may be used to keep books shut, but they are apt
to be in the way when the book is read, and as hardly anybody troubles
to tie them, they are generally of very little use.


                           METAL ON BINDINGS

Metal corners and bosses are a great protection to bindings, but if
the books are to go into shelves, the metal must be quite smooth and
flat. A metal shoe on the lower edge of the boards is an excellent
thing for preserving the binding of heavy books.

Bosses and other raised metal work should be restricted to books that
will be used on lecterns or reading desks. The frontispiece is from a
drawing of an early sixteenth-century book, bound in white pigskin,
and ornamented with brass corners, centres, and clasps; and at page
323 is shown a fifteenth-century binding with plain protecting bosses.
On this book there were originally five bosses on each board, but the
centre ones have been lost.

Bindings may be entirely covered with metal, but the connection
between the binding and the book is in that case seldom quite
satisfactory. The most satisfactory metal-covered bindings that I have
seen are those in which the metal is restricted to the boards. The
book is bound in wooden boards, with thick leather at the back, and
plaques of metal nailed to the wood. The metal may be set with jewels
or decorated with enamel, and embossed or chased in various ways.

Jewels are sometimes set in invisible settings below the leather of
bindings, giving them the appearance of being set in the leather. This
gives them an insecure look, and it is better to frankly show the
metal settings and make a decorative feature of them.




                              CHAPTER XIX

                                Leather


                                LEATHER

Of all the materials used by the bookbinders, leather is the most
important and the most difficult to select wisely. It is extremely
difficult to judge a leather by its appearance.

"We find now, that instead of leather made from sheep, calf, goat, and
pigskins, each having, when finished, its own characteristic surface,
that sheepskins are got up to look like calf, morocco, or pigskin;
that calf is grained to resemble morocco, or so polished and flattened
as to have but little character left; while goatskins are grained in
any number of ways, and pigskin is often grained like levant morocco.
So clever are some of these imitations, that it takes a skilled expert
to identify a leather when it is on a book."

There have been complaints for a long time of the want of durability
of modern bookbinding leather, but there has not been until lately any
systematic investigation into the causes of its premature decay.

By permission, I shall quote largely from the report of the committee
appointed by the Society of Arts to inquire into the subject. There
are on this special committee leather manufacturers, bookbinders,
librarians, and owners of libraries. The report issued is the result
of an immense amount of work done. Many libraries were visited, and
hundreds of experiments and tests were carried out by the
sub-committees. There is much useful information in the report that
all bookbinders and librarians should read. The work of the committee
is not yet finished, but its findings may be accepted as conclusive as
far as they go.

The committee first set themselves to ascertain if the complaints of
the premature decay of modern bookbinding leather are justified by
facts, and on this point report that:--

"As regards the common belief that modern binding leather does decay
prematurely, the sub-committee satisfied themselves that books bound
during the last eighty or hundred years showed far greater evidence of
deterioration than those of an earlier date. Many recent bindings
showed evidence of decay after so short a period as ten, or even five
years. The sub-committee came to the conclusion that there is ample
justification for the general complaint that modern leather is not so
durable as that formerly used. To fix the date of the commencement of
this deterioration was a difficult matter; but they came to the
conclusion that while leather of all periods showed some signs of
decay, the deterioration becomes more general on books bound after
1830, while some leathers seem to be generally good until about 1860,
after which date nearly all leathers seem to get worse. The
deterioration of calf bindings at the latter end of the 19th century
may be attributed as much to the excessive thinness as to the poor
quality of the material."

The committee endeavoured to ascertain the relative durability of the
leathers used for bookbinding, and after visiting many libraries, and
comparing bindings, they report as follows:--

"As to the suitability of various leathers, the sub-committee came to
the conclusion that of the old leathers (15th and 16th century), white
pigskin, probably alum 'tanned,' is the most durable, but its
excessive hardness and want of flexibility renders this leather
unsuitable for most modern work. Old brown calf has lasted fairly
well, but loses its flexibility, and becomes stiff and brittle when
exposed to light and air. Some of the white tawed skins of the 15th
and 16th century, other than white pigskin, and probably deerskin,
have lasted very well. Some 15th and 16th century sheepskin bindings
have remained soft and flexible, but the surface is soft, and usually
much damaged by friction. Vellum seems to have lasted fairly well, but
is easily influenced by atmospheric changes, and is much affected by
light. Early specimens of red morocco from the 16th to the end of the
18th century were found in good condition, and of all the leathers
noticed, this seems to be the least affected by the various conditions
to which it had been subjected. In the opinion of the committee, most
of this leather has been tanned with sumach or some closely allied
tanning material. Morocco bindings earlier than 1860 were generally
found to be in fairly good condition, but morocco after that date
seems to be much less reliable, and in many cases has become utterly
rotten. During the latter part of the 18th century it became customary
to pare down calf until it was as thin as paper. Since about 1830
hardly any really sound calf seems to have been used, as, whether
thick or thin, it appears generally to have perished. Sheepskin
bindings of the early part of the century are many of them still in
good condition. Since about 1860 sheepskin as sheepskin is hardly to
be found. Sheepskins are grained in imitation of other leathers, and
these imitation-grained leathers are generally found to be in a worse
condition than any of the other bindings, except, perhaps, some of the
very thin calfskin. Undyed modern pigskin seems to last well, but some
coloured pigskin bindings had entirely perished. Modern leathers dyed
with the aid of sulphuric acid are all to be condemned. In nearly
every case Russia leather was found to have become rotten, at least in
bindings of the last fifty years."

On the question of the causes of the decay noticed and the best
methods of preparing leather in the future, I may quote the
following:--

"The work of a sub-committee, which was composed of chemists specially
conversant with the treatment of leather, was directed specially to
the elucidation of the following points: an investigation of the
nature of the decay of leather used for bookbinding; an examination of
the causes which produced this decay; a research into the best
methods of preparing leather for bookbinding; and a consideration of
the points required to be dealt with in the preservation of books.

"Taking these points in order, the first one dealt with is the
question of the nature of the decay of leather. To arrive at their
conclusions on this subject, the sub-committee made a number of tests
and analyses of samples of decayed leather bookbindings, as well as of
leathers used for binding. The committee found that the most prevalent
decay was what they term a red decay, and this they think may be
differentiated into old and new, the old red decay being noticeable up
to about 1830, and the new decay since that date. In the old decay,
the leather becomes hard and brittle, the surface not being easily
abraded by friction. The older form is specially noticeable in
calf-bound books, tanned presumably with oak bark. The new form
affects nearly all leathers, and in extreme cases seems absolutely to
destroy the fibres. Another form of deterioration, more noticeable in
the newer books, renders the grain of the leather liable to peel off
when exposed to the slightest friction. This is the most common form
of decay noted in the more recent leathers. In nearly all samples of
Russia leather a very violent form of red decay was noticed. In many
cases the leather was found to be absolutely rotten in all parts
exposed to light and air, so that on the very slightest rubbing with a
blunt instrument the leather fell into fine dust....

"The second point is the cause of the decay. An extensive series of
experiments was carried out with a view of determining the causes of
the decay of bindings. The sub-committee find that this is caused by
both mechanical and by chemical influences. Of the latter, some are
due to mistakes of the leather manufacturer and the bookbinder, others
to the want of ventilation, and to improper heating and lighting of
libraries. In some cases inferior leathers are finished (by methods in
themselves injurious) so as to imitate the better class leathers, and
of course where these are used durability cannot be expected. But in
the main the injury for which the manufacturer and bookbinder are
responsible must be attributed rather to ignorance of the effect of
the means employed to give the leather the outward qualities required
for binding, than to the intentional production of an inferior
article.... Leathers produced by different tanning materials, although
they may be equally sound and durable mechanically, vary very much in
their resistance to other influences, such as light, heat, and gas
fumes.

"For bookbinding purposes, the sub-committee generally condemn the use
of tanning materials belonging to the catechol group, although the
leathers produced by the use of these materials are for many purposes
excellent, and indeed superior. The class of tanning materials which
produce the most suitable leather for this particular purpose belong
to the pyrogallol group, of which a well known and important example
is sumach. East Indian or 'Persian' tanned sheep and goat skins, which
are suitable for many purposes, and are now used largely for cheap
bookbinding purposes, are considered extremely bad. Books bound in
these materials have been found to show signs of decay in less than
twelve months, and the sub-committee are inclined to believe that no
book bound in these leathers, exposed on a shelf to sunlight or gas
fumes, can ever be expected to last more than five or six years.
Embossing leather under heavy pressure to imitate a grain has a very
injurious effect, while the shaving of thick skins greatly reduces the
strength of the leather by cutting away the tough fibres of the inner
part of the skin. The use of mineral acids in brightening the colour
of leather, and in the process of dyeing, has a serious effect in
lessening its resistance to decay. A good deal yet remains to be
learned about the relative permanency of the different dyes."

On analysis free sulphuric acid was found to be present in nearly all
bookbinding leather, and it is the opinion of the committee that even
a small quantity of this acid materially lessens the durability of the
leather.

"It has been shown by careful experiment, that even a minute quantity
of sulphuric acid used in the dye bath to liberate the colour is at
once absorbed by the leather, and that no amount of subsequent washing
will remove it. In a very large proportion of cases the decay of
modern sumach-tanned leather has been due to the sulphuric acid used
in the dye bath, and retained in the skin. We have examined very many
samples of leather manufactured and sold specially for bookbinding
purposes, from different factories, bought from different dealers, or
kindly supplied by bookbinders and by librarians, and have found them
to contain, in a large number of cases, free sulphuric acid, from 0.5
up to 1.6 per cent."

The publication of the report should tend to fix a standard for
bookbinding leather. Hitherto there has been no recognised standard.
Bookbinders have selected leather almost entirely by its appearance.
It has now been shown that appearance is no test of durability, and
the mechanical test of tearing the leather is insufficient. Sound
leather should tear with difficulty, and the torn edges should be
fringed with long, silky fibres, and any leather which tears very
easily, and shows short, curled-up fibres at the torn edges, should be
discarded. But though good bookbinding leather will tear with
difficulty, and show long fibres where torn, that is in itself not a
sufficient test; because it has been shown that the leather that is
mechanically the strongest, is not necessarily the most durable and
the best able to resist the adverse influences to which books are
subject in libraries.

The report shows that bookbinders and librarians are not, as a general
rule, qualified to select leather for bookbinding. In the old days,
when the manufacture of leather was comparatively simple, a bookbinder
might reasonably be expected to know enough of the processes employed
to be able to select his leather. But now so complicated is the
manufacture, and so many are the factors to be considered, that an
expert should be employed.

"The committee have satisfied themselves that it is possible to test
any leather in such a way as to guarantee its suitability for
bookbinding. They have not come to any decision as to the desirability
of establishing any formal or official standard, though they consider
that this is a point which well deserves future consideration."

It is to be hoped that some system of examining and hall-marking
leather by some recognised body, may be instituted. If librarians will
specify that the leather to be employed must be certified to be
manufactured according to the recommendations of the Society of Arts
Committee, there is no reason why leathers should not be obtained as
durable as any ever produced. This would necessitate the examining and
testing of batches of leather by experts. At present this can be done
more or less privately at various places, such as the Yorkshire
College, Leeds, or the Herolds' Institute, Bermondsey. In the near
future it is to be hoped that some recognised public body, such as one
of the great City Companies interested in leather, may be induced to
establish a standard, and to test such leathers as are submitted to
them, hall-marking those that come up to the standard. This would
enable bookbinders and librarians, in ordering leather, to be sure
that it had not been injured in its manufacture. The testing, if done
by batches, should not add greatly to the cost of the leather.

On the question of the qualities of an ideal bookbinding leather the
committee report:--

"It is the opinion of the committee, that the ideal bookbinding
leather must have, and retain, great flexibility.... (It) must have a
firm grain surface, not easily damaged by friction, and should not be
artificially grained.... The committee is of opinion that a pure
sumach tannage will answer all these conditions, and that leather can,
and will, be now produced that will prove to be as durable as any made
in the past."

The committee has so far only dealt with vegetable-tanned leather. I
have used, with some success, chrome-tanned calfskin. Chrome leather
is difficult to pare, and to work, as it does not become soft when
wet, like vegetable-tanned leather. It will stand any reasonable
degree of heat, and so might perhaps be useful for top-shelf bindings
and for shelf edging. It is extremely strong mechanically, but without
further tests I cannot positively recommend it except for trial.

While the strength and probable durability of leather can only be
judged by a trained leather chemist, there remains for the binders
selection, the kind of leather to use, and its colour.

Most of the leather prepared for bookbinding is too highly finished.
The finishing processes add a good deal to the cost of the leather,
and are apt to be injurious to it, and as much of the high finish is
lost in covering, it would be better for the bookbinder to get rougher
leather and finish it himself when it is on the book.

The leathers in common use for bookbinding are:--

    Goatskin, known as morocco.
    Calf, known as calf and russia.
    Sheepskin, known as roan, basil, skiver, &c.
    Pigskin, known as pigskin.
    Sealskin, known as seal.

_Morocco_ is probably the best leather for extra binding if properly
prepared, but experiment has shown that the expensive Levant moroccos
are nearly always ruined in their manufacture. A great many samples of
the most expensive Levant morocco were tested, with the result that
they were all found to contain free sulphuric acid.

_Calf._--Modern vegetable-tanned calf has become a highly
unsatisfactory material, and until some radical changes are made in
the methods of manufacturing it, it should not be used for
bookbinding.

_Sheepskin._--A properly tanned sheepskin makes a very durable, though
rather soft and woolly, leather. Much of the bookbinding leather now
made from sheepskin is quite worthless. Bookbinders should refuse to
have anything to do with any leather that has been artificially
grained, as the process is apt to be highly injurious to the skin.

_Pigskin._--Pigskin is a thoroughly good leather naturally, and very
strong, especially the alumed skins; but many of the dyed pigskins are
found to be improperly tanned and dyed, and worthless for bookbinding.

_Sealskin_ is highly recommended by one eminent librarian, but I have
not yet had any experience of its use for bookbinding.

The leather that I have found most useful is the Niger goatskin,
brought from Africa by the Royal Niger Company; it is a very beautiful
colour and texture, and has stood all the tests tried, without serious
deterioration. The difficulty with this leather is that, being a
native production, it is somewhat carelessly prepared, and is much
spoiled by flaws and stains on the surface, and many skins are quite
worthless. It is to be hoped that before long some of the
manufacturers interested will produce skins as good in quality and
colour as the best Niger morocco, and with fewer flaws.

Much leather is ruined in order to obtain an absolutely even colour. A
slight unevenness of colours is very pleasing, and should rather be
encouraged than objected to. That the want of interest in absolutely
flat colours has been felt, is shown by the frequency with which the
binders get rid of flat, even colours by sprinkling and marbling.

On this point I may quote from the committee: "The sprinkling of
leather, either for the production of 'sprinkled' calf or 'tree' calf,
with ferrous sulphate (green vitriol) must be most strongly condemned,
as the iron combines with and destroys the tan in the leather, and
free sulphuric acid is liberated, which is still more destructive.
Iron acetate or lactate is somewhat less objectionable, but probably
the same effects may be obtained with aniline colours without risk to
the leather."




                              CHAPTER XX

                          Paper--Pastes--Glue


                                 PAPER

Paper may be made by hand or machinery, and either "laid" or "wove."
"Laid" papers are distinguished by wire marks, which are absent in
"wove" paper.

A sheet of hand-made paper has all round it a rough uneven edge called
the "deckle," that is a necessary result of its method of manufacture.
The early printers looked upon this ragged edge as a defect, and
almost invariably trimmed most of it off before putting books into
permanent bindings. Book-lovers quite rightly like to find traces of
the "deckle" edge, as evidence that a volume has not been unduly
reduced by the binder. But it has now become the fashion to admire the
"deckle" for its own sake, and to leave books on hand-made paper
absolutely untrimmed, with ragged edges that collect the dirt, are
unsightly, and troublesome to turn over. So far has this craze gone,
that machine-made paper is often put through an extra process to give
it a sham deckle edge.

Roughly speaking, paper varies in quality according to the proportion
of fibrous material, such as rag, used in the manufacture. To make
paper satisfactorily by hand, a large proportion of such fibrous
material is necessary, so that the fact that the paper is hand-made is
to some extent a guarantee of its quality. There are various qualities
of hand-made paper, made from different materials, chiefly linen and
cotton rags. The best paper is made from pure linen rag, and poorer
hand-made paper from cotton rag, while other qualities contain a
mixture of the two or other substances.

It is possible to make a thoroughly good paper by machinery if good
materials are used. Some excellent papers are made by machinery; but
the enormous demand for paper, together with the fact that now almost
any fibrous material can be made into paper, has resulted in the
production, in recent years, of, perhaps, the worst papers that have
ever been seen.

This would not matter if the use of the poor papers were restricted to
newspapers and other ephemeral literature, but when, as is often the
case, paper of very poor quality is used for books of permanent
literary interest, the matter is serious enough.

Among the worst papers made are the heavily loaded "Art" papers that
are prepared for the printing of half-toned process blocks. It is to
be hoped that before long the paper makers will produce a paper that,
while suitable for printing half-toned blocks, will be more
serviceable, and will have a less unpleasant surface.

Several makers produce coloured handmade papers suitable for end
papers. Machine-made papers can be had in endless variety from any
number of makers.

The paper known as "Japanese Vellum" is a very tough material, and
will be found useful for repairing vellum books; the thinnest variety
of it is very suitable for mending the backs of broken sections, or
for strengthening weak places in paper.

The following delightful account of paper making by hand is quoted
from "Evelyn's Diary, 1641-1706."

"I went to see my Lord of St. Alban's house at Byflete, an old large
building. Thence to the paper mills, where I found them making a
coarse white paper. They cull the raggs, which are linnen, for white
paper, woollen for brown, then they stamp them in troughs to a papp
with pestles or hammers like the powder-mills, then put it into a
vessell of water, in which they dip a frame closely wyred with a wyre
as small as a haire, and as close as a weaver's reede; on this they
take up the papp, the superfluous water draining thro' the wyre; this
they dextrously turning, shake out like a pancake on a smooth board
between two pieces of flannell, then press it between a greate presse,
the flannell sucking out the moisture; then taking it out they ply and
dry it on strings, as they dry linnen in the laundry; then dip it in
alum-water, lastly polish and make it up in quires. They put some gum
in the water in which they macerate the raggs. The mark we find on the
sheets is formed in the wyre."

The following are the more usual sizes of printing papers--

                      Inches.

    Foolscap          17   13
    Crown             20   15
    Post              19  15
    Demy              22  17
    Medium             24  19
    Royal              25  20
    Double Pott        25  15
      "    Foolscap    27  17
    Super Royal        27  21
    Double Crown       30  20
    Imperial           30  22
    Double Post       31  19

The corresponding sizes of hand-made papers may differ slightly from
the above.

Although the above are the principal sizes named, almost any size can
be made to order.

The following is an extract from the report of the Committee of the
Society of Arts on the deterioration of paper, published in 1898: "The
committee find that the paper-making fibres may be ranged into four
classes:--

    A. Cotton, flax, and hemp.
    B. Wood, celluloses (_a_) sulphite process,
       and (_b_) soda and sulphate process.
    C. Esparto and straw celluloses.
    D. Mechanical wood pulp.

In regard, therefore, to papers for books and documents of permanent
value, the selection must be taken in this order, and always with due
regard to the fulfilment of the conditions of normal treatment above
dealt with as common to all papers."

"The committee have been desirous of bringing their investigations to
a practical conclusion in specific terms, viz. by the suggestion of
standards of quality. It is evident that in the majority of cases,
there is little fault to find with the practical adjustments which
rule the trade. They are, therefore, satisfied to limit their specific
findings to the following, viz., _Normal standard of quality for book
papers required for publications of permanent value._ For such papers
they would specify as follows:--

"_Fibres._ Not less than 70 per cent. of fibres of Class A.

"_Sizing._ Not more than 2 per cent. rosin, and finished with the
normal acidity of pure alum.

"_Loading._ Not more than 10 per cent. total mineral matter (ash).

"With regard to written documents, it must be evident that the proper
materials are those of Class A, and that the paper should be pure,
and sized with gelatine, and not with rosin. All imitations of
high-class writing papers, which are, in fact, merely disguised
printing papers, should be carefully avoided."


                                PASTES

To make paste for covering books, &c., take 2 oz. of flour, and 
oz. of powdered alum, and well mix with enough water to form a thin
paste, taking care to break up any lumps. Add a pint of cold water,
and heat gently in an enamelled saucepan. As it becomes warm, it
should be stirred from time to time, and when it begins to boil it
should be continually stirred for about five minutes. It should then
form a thick paste that can be thinned with warm water. Of course any
quantity can be made if the proportions are the same.

Paste for use is best kept in a wooden trough, called a "paste tub."
The paste tub will need to be cleaned out from time to time, and all
fragments of dry paste removed. This can easily be done if it is left,
overnight, filled with water. Before using, the paste should be well
beaten up with a flat stick.

For pasting paper, it should have about the consistency and smoothness
of cream; for leather, it can be thicker. For very thick leather a
little thin glue may be added. Paste made with alum will keep about a
fortnight, but can be kept longer by the addition of corrosive
sublimate in the proportion of one part of corrosive sublimate to a
thousand parts of paste. Corrosive sublimate, being a deadly poison,
will prevent the attack of bookworms or other insects, but for the
same reason must only be used by responsible people, and paste in
which it is used must be kept out of the way of domestic animals.

Several makes of excellent prepared paste can be bought in London.
These pastes are as cheap as can be made, and keep good a long time.

Paste that has become sour should never be used, as there is danger
that the products of its acid fermentation may injure the leather.

Paste tubs as sold often have an iron bar across them to wipe the
brush on. This should be removed, and replaced by a piece of twisted
cord. Paste brushes should be bound with string or zinc; copper or
iron will stain the paste.


                        WHITE PASTE FOR MENDING

A good paste for mending is made from a teaspoonful of ordinary flour,
two teaspoonsful of cornflour, half a teaspoonful of alum, and three
ounces of water. These should be carefully mixed, breaking up all
lumps, and then should be heated in a clean saucepan, and stirred all
the time with a wooden or bone spoon. The paste should boil for about
five minutes, but not too fast, or it will burn and turn brown.
Rice-flour or starch may be substituted for cornflour, and for very
white paper the wheaten flour may be omitted. Ordinary paste is not
nearly white enough for mending, and is apt to leave unsightly stains.

Cornflour paste may be used directly after it is made, and will keep
good under ordinary circumstances for about a week. Directly it gets
hard or goes watery, a new batch must be made.


                                 GLUE

It is important for bookbinders that the glue used should be of good
quality, and the best hide glue will be found to answer well. To
prepare it for use, the glue should be broken up into small pieces and
left to soak overnight in water. In the morning it should be soft and
greatly swollen, but not melted, and can then be put in the glue-pot
and gently simmered until it is fluid. It is then ready for use. Glue
loses in quality by being frequently heated, so that it is well not to
make a great quantity at a time. The glue-pot should be thoroughly
cleaned out before new glue is put into it, and the old glue sticking
round the sides taken out.

Glue should be used hot and not too thick. If it is stringy and
difficult to work, it can be broken up by rapidly twisting the brush
in the glue-pot. For paper the glue should be very thin and well
worked up with the brush before using.

The following is quoted from "Chambers' Encyclopdia" article on
Glue:--

"While England does not excel in the manufacture, it is a recognised
fact that Scottish glue ... ranks in the front of the glues of all
countries. A light-coloured glue is not necessarily good, nor a
dark-coloured glue necessarily bad. A bright, clear, claret colour is
the natural colour of hide glue, which is the best and most
economical.

"Light-coloured glues (as distinguished from gelatine) are made either
from bones or sheepskins. The glue yielded by these materials cannot
compare with the strength of that yielded by hides.

"A great quantity is now made in France and Germany from bones. It is
got as a by-product in the manufacture of animal charcoal. Although
beautiful to look at, it is found when used to be far inferior to
Scottish hide glue."




                                PART II

                       CARE OF BOOKS WHEN BOUND




                              CHAPTER XXI

           Injurious Influences to which Books are Subjected


_Gas Fumes._--The investigation of the Society of Arts Committee shows
that--

"Of all the influences to which books are exposed in libraries, gas
fumes--no doubt because of the sulphuric and sulphurous acid which
they contain--are shown to be the most injurious."

The injurious effects of gas fumes on leather have been recognised for
a long time, and gas is being, very generally, given up in libraries
in consequence. If books must be kept where gas is used, they should
not be put high up in the room, and great attention should be paid to
ventilation. It is far better, where possible, to avoid the use of gas
at all in libraries.

_Light._--The committee also report that "light, and especially direct
sunlight and hot air, are shown to possess deleterious influences
which had scarcely been suspected previously, and the importance of
moderate temperature and thorough ventilation of libraries cannot be
too much insisted on."

The action of light on leather has a disintegrating effect, very
plainly seen when books have stood for long periods on shelves placed
at right angles to windows. At Oxford and Cambridge and at the British
Museum Library the same thing was noticed. The leather on that side,
of the backs of books, next to the light, was absolutely rotten,
crumbling to dust at the slightest friction, while at the side away
from the light it was comparatively sound. Vellum bindings were even
more affected than those of leather.

The committee advise that library windows exposed to the direct
sunlight should be glazed with tinted glass.

"Some attempts have been made to determine the effect of light
transmitted through glasses of different colours, and they point to
the fact that blue and violet glass pass light of nearly as
deleterious quality as white glass; while leathers under red, green,
and yellow glasses were almost completely protected. There can be no
doubt that the use of pale yellow or olive-green glass in library
windows exposed to direct sunlight is desirable. A large number of
experiments have been made on the tinted 'cathedral' glasses of
Messrs. Pilkington Bros., Limited, with the result that Nos. 812 and
712 afforded almost complete protection during two months' exposure to
sunlight, while Nos. 704 and 804 may be recommended where only very
pale shades are permissible. The glasses employed were subjected to
careful spectroscopic examination, and to colour-measurement by the
tintometer, but neither were found to give precise indications as to
the protective power of the glasses, which is no doubt due to the
absorption of the violet, and especially of the invisible ultra-violet
rays. An easy method of comparing glasses is to expose under them to
sunlight the ordinary sensitised albumenised photographic paper.
Those glasses under which this is least darkened are also most
protective to leather."

_Tobacco._--Smoking was found to be injurious, and it is certainly a
mistake to allow it in libraries.

"The effect of ammonia vapour, and tobacco fumes, of which ammonia is
one of the active ingredients, was also examined. The effect of
ammonia fumes was very marked, darkening every description of leather,
and it is known that in extreme cases it causes a rapid form of decay.
Tobacco smoke had a very similar darkening and deleterious effect
(least marked in the case of sumach tanned leathers), and there can be
no doubt that the deterioration of bindings in a library where smoking
was permitted and the rooms much used, must have been partly due to
this cause."

_Damp._--Books kept in damp places will develop mildew, and both
leather and paper will be ruined.

Where possible, naturally dry rooms should be used for libraries, and
if not naturally dry, every means possible should be taken to render
them so. It will sometimes be found that the only way to keep the
walls of an old house dry is to put in a proper dampcourse. There are
various other methods employed, such as lining the walls with thin
lead, or painting them inside and out with some waterproofing
preparation: but as long as a wall remains in itself damp, it is
doubtful if any of these things will permanently keep the damp from
penetrating.

Bookshelves should never be put against the wall, nor the books on the
floor. There should always be space for air to circulate on all sides
of the bookshelves. Damp is specially injurious if books are kept
behind closely-fitting doors. The doors of bookcases should be left
open from time to time on warm days.

Should mildew make its appearance, the books should be taken out,
dried and aired, and the bookshelves thoroughly cleaned. The cause of
the damp should be sought for, and measures taken to remedy it.
Library windows should not be left open at night, nor during damp
weather, but in warm fine weather the more ventilation there is, the
better.

_Heat._--While damp is very injurious to books on account of the
development of mildew, unduly hot dry air is almost as bad, causing
leather to dry up and lose its flexibility. On this point the Chairman
of the Society of Arts Committee says:--

"Rooms in which books are kept should not be subject to extremes,
whether of heat or cold, of moisture or dryness. It may be said that
the better adapted a room is for human occupation, the better for the
books it contains. Damp is, of course, most mischievous, but
over-dryness induced by heated air, especially when the pipes are in
close proximity to the bookcases, is also very injurious."

_Dust._--Books should be taken from the shelves at least once a year,
dusted and aired, and the bindings rubbed with a preservative.

To dust a book, it should be removed from the shelf, and without being
opened, turned upside down and flicked with a feather duster. If a
book with the dust on the top is held loosely in the hand, and dusted
right way up, dust may fall between the leaves. Dusting should be done
in warm, dry weather; and afterwards, the books may be stood on the
table slightly open, to air, with their leaves loose. Before being
returned to the shelves, the bindings should be lightly rubbed with
some preservative preparation (see chap. XXII). Any bindings that are
broken, or any leaves that are loose should be noted, and the books
put on one side to be sent to the binder. It would be best when the
library is large enough to warrant it, to employ a working bookbinder
to do this work; such a man would be useful in many ways. He could
stick on labels, repair bindings, and do many other odd jobs to keep
the books in good repair.

A bookbinder could be kept fully employed, binding and repairing the
books of a comparatively small library under the direction of the
librarian.


                               BOOKWORMS

The insects known as bookworms are the larv of several sorts of
beetles, most commonly perhaps of _Antobium domesticum_ and _Niptus
hololencus_. They are not in any way peculiar to books and will infest
the wood of bookshelves, walls, or floors. A good deal can be done to
keep "worms" away by using such substances as camphor or naphthaline
in the bookcase. Bookworms do not attack modern books very much;
probably they dislike the alum put in the paste and the mill-boards
made of old tarred rope.

In old books, especially such as come from Italy, it is often found
that the ravages of the bookworms are almost entirely confined to the
glue on the backs of the books, and it generally seems that the glue
and paste attract them. Probably if corrosive sublimate were put in
the glue and paste used it would stop their attacks. Alum is said to
be a preventive, but I have known bookworms to eat their way through
leather pasted on with paste containing alum, when, in recovering, the
old wooden boards containing bookworms have been utilised in error.

When on shaking the boards of an old book dust flies out, or when
little heaps of dust are found on the shelf on which an old book has
been standing, it may be considered likely that there are bookworms
present. It is easy to kill any that may be hatched, by putting the
book in an air-tight box surrounded with cotton wool soaked in ether;
but that will not kill the eggs, and the treatment must be repeated
from time to time at intervals of a few weeks.

Any book that is found to contain bookworms should be isolated and at
once treated. Tins may be put inside the boards to prevent the "worms"
eating into the leaves.

Speaking of bookworms, Jules Cousin says:--

"One of the simplest means to be employed (to get rid of bookworms) is
to place behind the books, especially in the place where the insects
show their presence most, pieces of linen soaked with essence of
turpentine, camphor, or an infusion of tobacco, and to renew them when
the smell goes off. A little fine pepper might also be scattered on
the shelf, the penetrating smell of which would produce the same
effect."

Possibly Keating's Insect Powder would answer as well or better than
pepper.


                             RATS AND MICE

Rats and mice will gnaw the backs of books to get at the glue, so,
means should be taken to get rid of these vermin if they should
appear. Mice especially will nibble vellum binding or the edges of
vellum books that have become greasy with much handling.


                              COCKROACHES

Cockroaches are very troublesome in libraries, eating the bindings.
Keating's Insect Powder will keep them away from books, but only so
long as it is renewed at short intervals.


                   PLACING THE BOOKS IN THE SHELVES

The Chairman of the Society of Arts Special Committee says on this
point:--

"It is important that a just medium should be observed between the
close and loose disposition of books in the shelves. Tight packing
causes the pulling off of the tops of book-backs, injurious friction
between their sides, and undue pressure, which tends to force off
their backs. But books should not stand loosely on the shelves. They
require support and moderate lateral pressure, otherwise the leaves
are apt to open and admit dust, damp, and mildew. The weight of the
leaves also in good-sized volumes loosely placed will often be found
to be resting on the shelf, making the backs concave, and spoiling the
shape and cohesion of the books.

"In libraries where classification is attempted there must be a
certain number of partially filled shelves. The books in these should
be kept in place by some such device as that in use in the British
Museum, namely, a simple flat angle piece of galvanised iron, on the
lower flange of which the end books rest, keeping it down, the upright
flange keeping the books close and preventing them from spreading."

He also speaks of the danger to bindings of rough or badly-painted
bookshelves:--

"Great care should be exercised when bookcases are painted or
varnished that the surface should be left hard, smooth, and dry.
Bindings, especially those of delicate texture, may be irreparably
rubbed if brought in contact with rough or coarsely-painted surfaces,
while the paint itself, years after its original application, is
liable to come off upon the books, leaving indelible marks. In such
cases pasteboard guards against the ends of the shelves are the only
remedy."




                             CHAPTER XXII

                 To Preserve Old Bindings--Re-backing


                       TO PRESERVE OLD BINDINGS

It is a well-known fact that the leather of bindings that are much
handled lasts very much better than that on books which remain
untouched on the shelves. There is little doubt that the reason for
this is that the slight amount of grease the leather receives from the
hands nourishes it and keeps it flexible. A coating of glair or
varnish is found to some extent to protect leather from adverse
outside influences, but, unfortunately, both glair and varnish tend
rather to harden leather than to keep it flexible, and they fail just
where failure is most serious, that is at the joints. In opening and
shutting, any coat of glair or varnish that has become hard will
crack, and expose the leather of the joint and back. Flexibility is an
essential quality in bookbinding leather, for as soon as the leather
at the joint of a binding becomes stiff it breaks away when the boards
are opened.

It would add immensely to the life of old leather bindings if
librarians would have them treated, say once a year, with some
preservative. The consequent expense would be saved many times over by
the reduction of the cost of rebinding. Such a preservative must not
stain, must not evaporate, must not become hard, and must not be
sticky. Vaseline has been recommended, and answers fairly well, but
will evaporate, although slowly. I have found that a solution of
paraffin wax in castor oil answers well. It is cheap and very simple
to prepare. To prepare it, some castor oil is put into an earthenware
jar, and about half its weight of paraffin wax shredded into it. On
warming, the wax will melt, and the preparation is ready for use.

A little of the preparation is well worked into a piece of flannel,
and the books rubbed with it, special attention being paid to the back
and joints. They may be further rubbed with the hand, and finally gone
over with a clean, soft cloth. Very little of the preparation need be
used on each book.

If bindings have projecting metal corners or clasps that are likely to
scratch the neighbouring books, pieces of mill-board, which may be
lined with leather or good paper, should be placed next them, or they
may have a cover made of a piece of mill-board bent round as shown at
fig. 120, and strengthened at the folds with linen. This may be
slipped into the shelf with the book with the open end outwards, and
will then hardly be seen.

    [Illustration: FIG. 120.]

Bindings which have previously had metal clasps, &c., often have
projecting fragments of the old nails. These should be sought for and
carefully removed or driven in, as they may seriously damage any
bindings with which they come in contact.

To protect valuable old bindings, cases may be made and lettered on
the back with the title of the book.

Loose covers that necessitate the bending back of the boards for their
removal are not recommended.


                              RE-BACKING

Bindings that have broken joints may be re-backed. Any of the leather
of the back that remains should be carefully removed and preserved. It
is impossible to get some leathers off tight backs without destroying
them, but with care and by the use of a thin folder, many backs can be
saved. The leather on the boards is cut a little back from the joint
with a slanting cut, that will leave a thin edge, and is then lifted
up with a folder. New leather, of the same colour is pasted on the
back, and tucked in under the old leather on the board. The leather
from the old back should have its edges pared and any lumps of glue or
paper removed and be pasted on to the new leather and bound tightly
with tape to make sure that it sticks.

When the leather at the corners of the board needs repairing, the
corner is glued and tapped with a hammer to make it hard and square,
and when it is dry a little piece of new leather is slipped under the
old and the corner covered.

When the sewing cords or thread of a book have perished it should be
rebound, but if there are any remains of the original binding they
should be preserved and utilised. If the old boards have quite
perished, new boards of the same nature and thickness should be got
out and the old cover pasted over them. Such places as the old leather
will not cover, must first be covered with new of the same colour.
Generally speaking, it is desirable that the characteristics of an old
book should be preserved, and that the new work should be as little in
evidence as possible. It is far more pleasant to see an old book in a
patched contemporary binding, than smug and tidy in the most
immaculate modern cover.

Part of the interest of any old book is its individual history, which
can be gathered from the binding, book-plates, marginal notes, names
of former owners, &c., and anything that tends to obliterate these
signs is to be deplored.




                            SPECIFICATIONS


                    SPECIFICATIONS FOR BOOKBINDING

These specifications will require modification in special cases, and
are only intended to be a general guide.

------------+---------+-------------+----------+--------+----------+-------
            | SHEETS. | END PAPERS. | PRESSING.| EDGES. |  SEWING. | BACK.
------------+---------+-------------+----------+--------+----------+-------
            |To be    |To be sewn   |Books on  |To be   |To be with|To be
     I.     |carefully|on. To be of |handmade  |trimmed |ligature  |kept
For Extra   |folded,  |good paper   |paper not |and gilt|silk,     |as
Binding     |or, if   |made with    |to be     |before  |flexible, |flat
suitable    |an old   |zigzag, with |pressed   |sewing. |round five|as it
for Valuable|book, all|board papers |unduly.   |To be   |bands of  |can be
Books. Whole|damaged  |of self-     |          |uncut.  |best      |without
Leather.    |leaves to|coloured     |          |        |sewing    |forcing
            |be       |paper of good|          |        |cord.     |it and
            |carefully|quality, or  |          |        |          |without
            |mended,  |vellum. Or to|          |        |          |danger
            |the backs|be made with |          |        |          |of its
            |where    |leather      |          |        |          |becom-
            |damaged  |joint.       |          |        |          |ing
            |to be    |             |          |        |          |concave
            |made     |             |          |        |          |in use.
            |sound.   |             |          |        |          |
            |Single   |             |          |        |          |
            |leaves   |             |          |        |          |
            |to be    |             |          |        |          |
            |guarded  |             |          |        |          |
            |round    |             |          |        |          |
            |the      |             |          |        |          |
            |sections |             |          |        |          |
            |next     |             |          |        |          |
            |them. All|             |          |        |          |
            |plates to|             |          |        |          |
            |be       |             |          |        |          |
            |guarded. |             |          |        |          |
            |Guards to|             |          |        |          |
            |be sewn  |             |          |        |          |
            |through. |             |          |        |          |
            |No past- |             |          |        |          |
            |ing on   |             |          |        |          |
            |or over- |             |          |        |          |
            |casting  |             |          |        |          |
            |to be    |             |          |        |          |
            |allowed. |             |          |        |          |
------------+---------+-------------+----------+--------+----------+-------
            |As No.   |To be of good|Same as   |To be   |To be with|Same as
     II.    |I.,      |paper made   |No. I.    |cut and |unbleached|for No.
For Good    |excepting|with zigzag, |          |gilt in |thread,   |I.
Binding for |that any |with board   |          |boards  |flexible, |
Books of    |mending  |papers of    |          |or      |round five|
Reference,  |may be   |self-coloured|          |coloured|bands of  |
Catalogues, |done     |paper of good|          |or to be|best      |
&c., and    |rather   |quality.     |          |uncut.  |sewing    |
other heavy |with a   |Large or     |          |        |cord.     |
Books that  |view to  |heavy books  |          |        |          |
may have a  |strength |to have a    |          |        |          |
great deal  |than     |cloth joint. |          |        |          |
of use.     |extreme  |To be sewn   |          |        |          |
Whole or    |neatness.|on.          |          |        |          |
Half        |         |             |          |        |          |
Leather.    |         |             |          |        |          |
------------+---------+-------------+----------+--------+----------+-------
            |Same as  |To be of good|Same as   |To be   |To be with|Same as
    III.    |No. II.  |paper, sewn  |No. I.    |uncut,  |unbleached|for
For Binding |         |on, made with|          |or to be|thread    |Nos. I.
for         |         |zigzag.      |          |cut in  |across not|and II.
Libraries,  |         |             |          |guillo- |less than |
IV. for     |         |             |          |tine and|four      |
Books in    |         |             |          |gilt or |unbleached|
current     |         |             |          |coloured|linen     |
use. Half   |         |             |          |or to   |tapes.    |
Leather.    |         |             |          |have top|          |
            |         |             |          |edge    |          |
            |         |             |          |only    |          |
            |         |             |          |gilt.   |          |
------------+---------+-------------+----------+--------+----------+-------
            |Any      |Same as No.  |          |May be  |With      |Back to
    IV.     |leaves   |III.         |          |cut     |unbleached|be left
For Library |damaged  |             |          |smooth  |thread    |square
Bindings of |at the   |             |          |in      |over three|after
Books of    |back or  |             |          |guillo- |unbleached|glueing
little      |plates   |             |          |tine.   |linen     |up.
Interest or |to be    |             |          |        |tapes.    |
Value,      |overcast |             |          |        |          |
Cloth or    |into     |             |          |        |          |
Half Linen. |sections.|             |          |        |          |
------------+---------+-------------+----------+--------+----------+-------


            SPECIFICATIONS FOR BOOKBINDING--(_continued_).

------------+--------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+--------
            |BOARDS. |HEADBANDS.|  COVERS. |LETTERING.|DECORATION.|
------------+--------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+--------
            |To be of|To be     |Goatskin  |To be     |To be as   |All work
     I.	    |the best|worked    |(morocco),|legible   |much or as |to be
For Extra   |black   |with silk |pigskin   |and to    |little as  |done in
Binding     |mill-   |on strips |or seal-  |identify  |the nature |the best
suitable    |board.  |of vellum |skin manu-|the       |of the book|manner.
for Valuable|Two     |or catgut |factured  |volume.   |warrants.  |
Books. Whole|boards  |or cord,  |according |          |           |
Leather.    |to be   |with      |to the    |          |           |
            |made    |frequent  |recommend-|          |           |
            |together|tie-downs.|ations of |          |           |
            |for     |The head- |the       |          |           |
            |large   |bands to  |Society   |          |           |
            |books,  |be "set"  |of Arts'  |          |           |
            |and all |by pieces |Committee |          |           |
            |five    |of good   |on Leather|          |           |
            |bands   |paper or  |for       |          |           |
            |laced in|leather   |Book-     |          |           |
            |through |glued at  |binding.  |          |           |
            |two     |head and  |Whole     |          |           |
            |holes.  |tail. The |binding;  |          |           |
            |        |back to be|leather   |          |           |
            |        |lined up  |to be     |          |           |
            |        |with      |attached  |          |           |
            |        |leather   |directly  |          |           |
            |        |all over  |to the    |          |           |
            |        |if the    |back.     |          |           |
            |        |book is   |          |          |           |
            |        |large.    |          |          |           |
------------+--------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+--------
            |Same as |Same as   |Same as   |Same as   |To be      |Work may
    II.     |No. I., |No. I.    |No. I.,   |No. I.    |omitted, or|be a
For Good    |or may  |          |excepting |          |only to    |little
Binding for |be of   |          |that      |          |consist of |rougher,
Books of    |good    |          |properly  |          |a few lines|but not
Reference,  |grey    |          |prepared  |          |or dots or |careless
Catalogues, |board.  |          |sheepskin |          |other      |or
&c., and    |        |          |may be    |          |quite      |dirty.
other heavy |        |          |added.    |          |simple     |
Books that  |        |          |Half-     |          |ornament.  |
may have    |        |          |binding,  |          |           |
a great deal|        |          |leather   |          |           |
of use.     |        |          |only at   |          |           |
Whole or    |        |          |back.     |          |           |
Half        |        |          |Corners   |          |           |
Leather.    |        |          |to be     |          |           |
            |        |          |strength- |          |           |
            |        |          |ened with |          |           |
            |        |          |tips of   |          |           |
            |        |          |vellum.   |          |           |
            |        |          |Sides     |          |           |
            |        |          |covered   |          |           |
            |        |          |with good |          |           |
            |        |          |paper     |          |           |
            |        |          |or linen. |          |           |
------------+--------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+--------
            |To be   |To be     |Same as   |Same as   |To be      |Same as
    III.    |split   |worked    |Nos. I.   |Nos. I.   |omitted.   |No. II.
For Binding |grey    |with      |and II.,  |and II.   |           |
for         |boards, |thread    |but skins |          |           |
Libraries,  |or      |or vellum |may be    |          |           |
for Books   |straw-  |or cord,  |used where|          |           |
in current  |board   |or to be  |there are |          |           |
use. Half   |with    |omitted   |surface   |          |           |
Leather.    |black   |and a     |flaws that|          |           |
            |board   |piece of  |do not    |          |           |
            |liner,  |cord      |affect the|          |           |
            |with    |inserted  |strength. |          |           |
            |ends    |into the  |Leather to|          |           |
            |of tapes|turn in   |be used   |          |           |
            |attached|of the    |thicker   |          |           |
            |to      |leather at|than is   |          |           |
            |portion |head and  |usual,    |          |           |
            |of waste|tail in   |there     |          |           |
            |sheet,  |their     |being     |          |           |
            |inserted|place.    |French    |          |           |
            |between |          |joints.   |          |           |
            |them.   |          |Leather at|          |           |
            |Boards  |          |back only;|          |           |
            |to be   |          |paper     |          |           |
            |left a  |          |sides;    |          |           |
            |short   |          |vellum    |          |           |
            |distance|          |tips.     |          |           |
            |from the|          |          |          |           |
            |joint   |          |          |          |           |
            |to form |          |          |          |           |
            |a French|          |          |          |           |
            |joint.  |          |          |          |           |
------------+--------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+--------
            |To be   |No        |Whole     |Same as   |To be      |Same as
    IV.     |split   |headbands.|buckram   |Nos. I.   |omitted.   |No. II.
For Library |boards, |          |or half   |II. and   |           |
Bindings of |two     |          |linen and |III.      |           |
Books of    |straw-  |          |paper     |          |           |
little      |boards  |          |sides.    |          |           |
Interest or |made    |          |          |          |           |
Value, Cloth|together|          |          |          |           |
or Half     |and ends|          |          |          |           |
Linen.      |of slips|          |          |          |           |
            |insert- |          |          |          |           |
            |ed.     |          |          |          |           |
            |French  |          |          |          |           |
            |joint to|          |          |          |           |
            |be left.|          |          |          |           |
------------+--------+----------+----------+----------+-----------+--------




                               GLOSSARY


_Arming press_, a small blocking press used for striking arms-blocks
on the sides of books.

_Backing boards_, wedge-shaped bevelled boards used in backing (see
Fig. 40).

_Backing machine_, used for backing cheap work in large quantities; it
often crushes and damages the backs of the sections.

_Bands_, (1) the cords on which a book is sewn. (2) The ridges on the
back caused by the bands showing through the leather.

_Band nippers_, pincers with flat jaws, used for straightening the
bands (see Fig. 61). For nipping up the leather after covering, they
should be nickelled to prevent the iron staining the leather.

_Beating stone_, the "stone" on which books were formerly beaten; now
generally superseded by the rolling machine and standing press.

_Blind tooling_, the impression of finishing tools without gold.

_Blocking press_, a press used for impressing blocks such as those
used in decorating cloth cases.

_Board papers_, the part of the end papers pasted on to the boards.

_Bodkin_, an awl used for making the holes in the boards for the
slips.

_Bolt_, folded edge of the sheets in an unopened book.

_Cancels_, leaves containing errors, which have to be discarded and
replaced by corrected sheets. Such leaves are marked by the printer
with a star.

_Catch-word_, a word printed at the foot of one page indicating the
first word of the page following, as a guide in collating.

_Cutting boards_, wedge-shaped boards somewhat like backing boards,
but with the top edge square; used in cutting the edge of a book and
in edge-gilding.

_Cutting in boards_, cutting the edges of a book after the boards are
laced on.

_Cutting press_, when the lying press is turned, so that the side with
the runners is uppermost, it is called a cutting press (see Fig. 46).

_Diaper_, a term applied to a small repeating all-over pattern. From
woven material decorated in this way.

_Doublure_, the inside face of the boards, especially applied to them
when lined with leather and decorated.

_End papers_, papers added at the beginning and end of a book by the
binder.

_Extra binding_, a trade term for the best work.

_Finishing_, comprises lettering, tooling, and polishing, &c.

_Finishing press_, a small press used for holding books when they are
being tooled (see Fig. 84).

_Finishing stove_, used for heating finishing tools.

_Folder_, a flat piece of ivory or bone, like a paper knife, used in
folding sheets and in various other operations.

_Foredge_ (fore edge), the front edge of the leaves. Pronounced
"forrege."

_Forwarding_, comprises all the operations between sewing and
finishing, excepting headbanding.

_Gathering_, collecting one sheet from each pile in a printer's
warehouse to make up a volume.

_Glaire_, white of eggs beaten up, and used in finishing and edge
gilding.

_Half binding_, when the leather covers the back and only part of the
sides, a book is said to be half bound.

_Head band_, a fillet of silk or thread, worked at the head and tail
of the back.

_Head cap_, the fold of leather over the head band (see Fig. 67).

_Head and tail_, the top and bottom of a book.

_Imperfections_, sheets rejected by the binder and returned to the
printer to be replaced.

_India proofs_, strictly first proofs only of an illustration pulled
on "India paper," but used indiscriminately for all illustrations
printed on India paper.

_Inset_, the portion of a sheet cut off and inserted in folding
certain sizes, such as duodecimo, &c. (see Fig. 4).

_Inside margins_, the border made by the turn in of the leather on the
inside face of the boards (see Fig. 116).

_Joints_, (1) the groove formed in backing to receive the ends of the
mill-boards. (2) The part of the binding that bends when the boards
are opened. (3) Strips of leather or cloth used to strengthen the end
papers.

"_Kettle stitch_," catch stitch formed in sewing at the head and tail.

_Lacing in_, lacing the slips through holes in the boards to attach
them.

_Lying press_, the term applied to the under side of the cutting press
used for backing, usually ungrammatically called "laying press."

_Marbling_, colouring the edges and end papers in various patterns,
obtained by floating colours on a gum solution.

_Millboard machine_, machine used for squaring boards; should only be
used for cheap work, as an edge cut by it will not be as square as if
cut by the plough.

_Mitring_, (1) lines meeting at a right angle without overrunning are
said to be mitred. (2) A join at 45 as in the leather on the inside
of the boards.

_Overcasting_, over-sewing the back edges of single leaves or weak
sections.

_Peel_, a thin board on a handle used for hanging up sheets for
drying.

_Plate_, an illustration printed from a plate. Term often incorrectly
applied to illustrations printed from woodcuts. Any full-page
illustration printed on different paper to the book is usually called
a "plate."

_Pressing plates_, plates of metal japanned or nickelled, used for
giving finish to the leather on a book.

_Press pin_, an iron bar used for turning the screws of presses.

_Proof_, edges left uncut as "proof" that the book has not been unduly
cut down.

_Register_, (i.) when the print on one side of a leaf falls exactly
over that on the other it is said to register. (ii.) Ribbon placed in
a book as a marker.

_Rolling machine_, a machine in which the sheets of a book are subject
to heavy pressure by being passed between rollers.

_Sawing in_, when grooves are made in the back with a saw to receive
the bands.

_Section_, the folded sheet.

_Seme_ or _Semis_, an heraldic term signifying sprinkled.

_Set off_, print is said to "set off" when part of the ink from a page
comes off on an opposite page. This will happen if a book is pressed
too soon after printing.

_Sheet_, the full size of the paper as printed, forming a section when
folded.

_Signature_, the letter or figure placed on the first page of each
sheet.

_Slips_, the ends of the sewing cord or tape that are attached to the
boards.

_Squares_, the portion of the boards projecting beyond the edges of
the book.

_Start_, when, after cutting, one or more sections of the book come
forward, making the fore edge irregular, they are said to have
started.

_Straight edge_, a flat ruler.

_Tacky_, sticky.

_T. E. G._, top-edge gilt.

_Trimmed._ The edges of a book are said to be trimmed when the edges
of the larger (or projecting) leaves only have been cut.

_Tub_, the stand which supports the lying press. Originally an actual
tub to catch the shavings.

_Uncut_, a book is said to be uncut when the edges of the paper have
not been cut with the plough or guillotine.

_Unopened_, the book is said to be unopened if the bolts of the sheets
have not been cut.

_Waterproof sheets_, sheets of celluloid, such as are used by
photographers.

_Whole binding_, when the leather covers the back and sides of a
volume.

_Wire staples_ are used by certain machines in the place of thread for
securing the sections.

_Groove_, that part of the sections which is turned over in backing to
receive the board.




                       REPRODUCTIONS OF BINDINGS

                           I., II., AND III.

                FIFTEENTH CENTURY BLIND-TOOLED BINDINGS

                                  IV.

          SIXTEENTH CENTURY BINDING WITH SIMPLE GOLD-TOOLING

                       V., VI., VII., AND VIII.

                MODERN BINDINGS DESIGNED BY THE AUTHOR

    [Illustration: I.--German Fifteenth Century. Pigskin. Actual
    size, 8"  6".]

    [Illustration: II.--German Fifteenth Century. Calf. Actual
    size 12"  8".]

    [Illustration: III.--Italian Fifteenth Century. Sheepskin,
    with coloured roundels. Actual size, 11"  8".]

    [Illustration: IV.--Italian Sixteenth Century. Actual size,
    12"  8". Goatskin.]

    [Illustration: V.--Half Niger morocco, with sides of English
    oak. Actual size, 17"  11".]

    [Illustration: VI.--Niger morocco, inlaid green leaves.
    Actual size, 8"  5".]

    [Illustration: VII.--Green levant, inlaid with lighter green
    panel and red dots. Actual size, 6"  4".]

    [Illustration: VIII.--Niger morocco, executed by a student of
    the Central School of Arts and Crafts. Actual size, 11"  9".]




                                 INDEX


ARMING PRESS, 229, 313

Arms blocks, 228

Art paper, 48, 282

Autograph letters, 179


BACKING, 117

Backing hammer, 123

Back, lining up, 152

Band nippers, 160, 163

Bands, 313

Bandstick, 160

Beating, 90

Beating stone, 90, 313

Benzine, 207, 209

Binding, decoration of, 21, 30, 188, 233

Binding, collotype reproductions of, 321-336

Binding, embroidered, 186

Binding early printed books, 31, 46, 113

Binding, extra, 308

Binding, jewelled, 263

Binding, library, 27, 173, 308

Binding, manuscripts, 31, 108, 113, 125, 135, 223

Binding, metal-covered, 263

Binding, vellum, 180

Binding very thin books, 177

Blind tooling, 188, 222

Blocking press, 229, 313

Blocks, striking, 229

Boards, 124

Boards, attaching, 132

Boards, cutting, 125

Boards, filling in, 170

Boards, lining, 129

Boards, pressing, 193, 210

Boards, split, 28, 175, 311

Bodkin, 114

Bookbinding as a profession, 32

Books in sheets, 34

Bookworms, 297

Borders, designing, 240

Borders, inside, 253


CALF, 27, 277

Cancelled sheets, 43

Cased books, 19, 49

Castor oil, 303

Catch stitch, 99

Catch words, 314

Celluloid, sheets of, 161

Centres, designing, 241

Chrome leather, 276

Clasps and ties, 183, 259

Cleaning off back, 137

Cloth casing, 19, 49

Cloth joints, 86, 257

Cobden-Sanderson, T. J., xii., 22

Cockroaches, 300

Cocoanut oil, 200

Collating, 43

Colouring edges, 144

Combining tools to form patterns, 232

Compasses, 131

Cord sewing, 111

Corners, mitring, 165, 168

Cousin, Jules, 74, 299

Covering, 23, 159, 176, 310

Crushing the grain of leather, 192

Cutting in boards, 139

Cutting mill-boards, 124

Cutting press, 128


DAMP, effect of, on bindings, 294

Decoration of bindings, 21, 30, 188, 233

Designing tools, 230

Diaper patterns, 236

Dividers, 51

Dots, striking, 205

Doubluves, 253, 314

Dressing for old bindings, 302

Dust and dusting, 296


EARLY printed books, binding, 31, 46, 113

Edge colouring, 144

Edge gauffering, 144

Edge gilding, 95, 144

Edge sizing, 95, 146

Edges, painted, 146

Embroidered bindings, 186

End papers, 80, 254

End, painted, 83

End, vellum, 84

Ends, silk, 84

Entering, 33

Evelyn's Diary (quotation), 282

"Extra" binding, 308, 314


FALSE bands, 26

Fillet, 190, 206

Fillet, small, 206, 246

Filling in boards, 170

Finishing, 191

Finishing press, 194

Finishing tools, 188

Finishing stove, 195

Flattening vellum, 65

Folder, 164

Folding, 36

Fraying out slips, 114

French joint, 176

French paring knife, 156

French standing press, 91


GAS fumes, effect of, 291

Gathering, 35

Gauffering edges, 144

Gelatine, 70

Gilding edges, 95, 144

Gilt top, 92

Glaire, 97, 198

Glass, tinted, for libraries, 292

Glossary, 313

Glue, 289

Glueing up, 115

Goatskin, 277

Gold cushion, 200

Gold leaf, 199

Gold knife, 200

Gold, net for, 96

Gold, pad for, 201

Gold tooling, 188, 191

Gouges, 189, 205, 247

Groove (_see_ Joint)

Guarding, 42, 53

Guarding plates, 50, 56, 316


HAMMER, backing, 123

Hand-made paper, 280

Headbanding, 108, 147, 176

Headcaps, 156, 166

Heat, effect of, on bindings, 295

Heraldry on bindings, 227

Hinging plates, 57

Hollow backs, 25, 185


IMPERFECTIONS, 35

India proofs, soaking off, 62

India proofs, mounting, 63

Indiarubber for gold, 207

Inlaying leather, 213, 232, 243

Inlaying leaves or plates, 64

Inset, 40, 315

Inside margins, 253


JACONET, 60, 64

Japanese paper, 282

Japanese vellum, 282

Jewelled bindings, 263

Joint, 165, 169

Joint, cloth, 86, 257

Joint, French, 176

Joint, knocking out, 53

Joint, leather, 86, 171


KETTLE stitch, 49, 99, 105

Keys, sewing, 101

Knife, mountcutters', 54

Knife, French paring, 156

Knife, gold, 200

Knife, plough, 129, 139

Knocking down iron, 53, 134

Knocking out joints, 53

Knot, 100, 106


LACING in slips, 132

Lay cords, 100

Laying press (_see_ Lying press)

Leather, 27, 263

Leather, chrome, 276

Leather, crushing grain of, 192

Leather, inlaying, 213, 232, 243

Leather joints, 86, 171

Leather, paring, 154

Leather, polishing, 191

Leather, sprinkling and marbling, 27, 279

Leather, stretching, 23, 161

Leather, testing, 274

Leather work, 226

Leaves, inlaying, 64

Lettering, 28, 215, 246

Letters, autograph, 179

Library binding, 27, 173, 308

Light, effect of, on leather, 292

Lining up back, 152

Lithographic stone, 157, 160

Loose covers, 304

Lying press, 128


MANUSCRIPTS, binding of, 31, 108, 113, 125, 135, 223

Manuscripts, collating, 46

Maps, throwing out, 60

Marbled paper, 83

Margins, inside, 253

Marking up, 98

Materials for sewing, 111

Mending, 76

Mending tooling, 208

Mending vellum, 79

Metal on bindings, 262

Millboards, 124

Millboard machine, 127, 315

Millboard shears, 126

Mitring corners, 165, 168

Morocco, 277

Morocco, "Persian," 271

Mount-cutters' knife, 54

Mounting India-proofs, 63

Mounting very thin paper, 63


NET for gilding edges, 96

Niger morocco, 278

Nipping press, 211

Nippers, band, 160, 163


OIL, cocoanut, 200

Opening newly-bound books, 257

Overcasting, 51

"Overs," 35

Oxalic acid, use of, 173


PAD for gold, 201

Paging, 44

Painted edges, 146

Painted end papers, 83

Pallets, 189

Paper, 280

Paper, art, 48, 283

Paper, hand-made, 280

Paper, Japanese, 282

Paper, marbled, 83

Paper, sizes of, 36, 283

Paper, sizing, 67

Paper, splitting, 63

Paper, washing, 71

Paraffin wax, 303

Paring leather, 154

Paring paper, 61

Paring stone, 157, 160

Pastes, 286

Paste water, 198

Pasting down end papers, 254

Patterns, 232

"Peel," 316

Permanent binding, 19

"Persian" morocco, 271

Pigskin, 278

Plates, detaching, 48

Plates, guarding, 56

Plates, hinging, 57

Plates, inlaying, 64

Plates, trimming, 40

Plough, 128

Plough knife, 129, 139

Polishing, 191

Preserving old bindings, 302

Press, arming, 229, 313

Press, blocking, 229, 313

Press, cutting, 128

Press, finishing, 194

Press, lying, 128

Press, nipping, 211

Press pin, 316

Press, sewing (_see_ Sewing frame)

Press, standing, 88

Pressing boards, 193, 210

Pressing in boards, 138

Pressing plates, 192, 316

Pressing sections, 87

"Proof," 316

Publishers' binding, 20

Pulling to pieces, 46


QUARTER sections, 42

Quires, books in, 34


RATS and mice, 299

Re-backing, 305

Re-binding, 18, 306

Refolding, 51

Register of printing, 52, 316

Representations of bindings, 321-336

Roll, 190

Rounding, 117


SAWING in, 20, 25, 100, 108

Scrap books, 178

Sealskin, 278

Sections, pressing, 87

Sewing, 100

Sewing cord, 111

Sewing frame, 100

Sewing keys, 101

Sewing on tapes, 26, 111, 174

Sewing on vellum slips, 111, 181

Sewing silk, 112

Sewing, tape for, 112

Sewing thread, 112

Sheepskin, 277-308

Sheets, books in, 34

Sheets, waterproof, 161

Signatures, 34, 43

Silk ends, 84

Silk sewing, 112

Sizes of paper, 36, 283

Sizing, 67

Sizing edges, 95-146

Sizing leather, 198

Sizing paper, 67

Slips, 317

Slips, fraying out, 114

Slips, lacing in, 132

Soaking off India proofs, 62

Society of Arts, Report of Committee on Leather for Bookbinding, 22, 264

Society of Arts, Report of Committee on Paper, 284

Specifications, 308

Split boards, 28, 175, 311

Splitting paper, 63

Sprinkling leather, 27, 279

Squares, 131, 153, 317

Standing press, 88

Standing press, French, 89, 91

Staples, wire, 49

"Starred" sheets, 43

Stove, finishing, 195

Stone, lithographic, 157, 160

Striking dots, 205

Striking tools, 204


TAPE, sewing on, 26, 112, 174

Temporary binding, 20

Testing leather, 274

Thin books, binding, 177

Thin paper, mounting, 63

Thread, sewing, 112

Throwing out maps, 60

Ties and clasps, 183, 259

Tobacco smoke, effect of, on binding, 294

Tooling, blind, 188, 222

Tooling, gold, 24, 188, 191

Tooling on vellum, 212

Tools, designing, 188, 230

Tools, finishing, 188, 230

Training for bookbinding, 32

Trimming before sewing, 93

Trimming machine, 94

Trimming plates, 40

Tub, 317

Tying up, 167


VARNISH, 209

Vellum binders, 26

Vellum bindings, 180

Vellum ends, 84

Vellum, flattening, 65

Vellum, Japanese, 282

Vellum, mending, 79

Vellum slips, sewing on, 111, 183

Vellum tooling on, 212


WALKER, Emery, 216

Washing, 71

Waterproof sheets, 161

Weaver's knot, 106

Wooden boards, 32, 135, 223, 330

Worm holes, 78, 297




                     THE ARTISTIC CRAFTS SERIES OF
                         TECHNICAL HANDBOOKS.

                       Edited by W. R. LETHABY.


The series will appeal to handicraftsmen in the industrial and
mechanic arts. It consists of authoritative statements by experts in
every field for the exercise of ingenuity, taste, imagination--the
whole sphere of the so-called "dependent arts."

    BOOKBINDING AND THE CARE OF BOOKS. A Handbook for Amateurs,
    Bookbinders, and Librarians. By DOUGLAS COCKERELL. With 120
    Illustrations and Diagrams by Noel Rooke, and 8 collotype
    reproductions of binding. 12mo. $1.25 net.

    SILVERWORK AND JEWELRY. A Text-Book for Students and Workers
    in Metal. By H. WILSON. With 160 Diagrams and 16 full-page
    Illustrations, 12mo. $1.40 net.

    WOOD CARVING: DESIGN AND WORKMANSHIP. By GEORGE JACK. With
    Drawings by the Author and other Illustrations. $1.40 net.

    STAINED-GLASS WORK. A Text-Book for Students and Workers in
    Glass. By C. W. WHALL. With Diagrams by two of his
    Apprentices, and other Illustrations. $1.50 net; postage, 14
    cents additional.

                  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK.




                          TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

Obvious typographic errors have been corrected. For the detailed list
see below. The tables have been slightly modified to optimize
presentation.

page 014--typo fixed: changed 'Making' to 'Marking'
page 138--spelling normalized: changed 'head-banding' to 'headbanding'
page 159--typo fixed: changed 'wook' to 'wood'
page 173--typo fixed: changed 'CHAPTER VIII' to 'CHAPTER XIII'
page 198--typo fixed: changed 'isinglas' to 'isinglass'
page 249--spelling normalized: changed 'tie downs' to 'tie-downs'
page 253--spelling normalized: changed 'headcap' to 'head-cap'
page 298--spelling normalized: changed 'millboard' to 'mill-board'
page 303--spelling normalized: changed 're-binding' to 'rebinding'
page 304--spelling normalized: changed 'millboard' to 'mill-board'
page 310--spelling normalized: changed 'Goat-skin' to 'Goatskin'
page 314--spelling normalized: changed 'head-banding' to 'headbanding'
page 315--spelling normalized: changed 'millboards' to 'mill-boards'
page 339--spelling normalized: changed 'millboards' to 'mill-boards'
page 341--spelling normalized: changed 'Re-folding' to 'Refolding'







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bookbinding, and the Care of Books, by 
Douglas Cockerell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BOOKBINDING, AND THE CARE OF BOOKS ***

***** This file should be named 26672-8.txt or 26672-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/7/26672/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Irma Spehar and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
